Evidence Based Library and Information Practice 2020, 15.3 
 
103 
 
   Evidence Based Library and Information Practice 
 
 
 
Research Article 
 
Making Job Postings More Equitable: Evidence Based Recommendations from an Analysis 
of Data Professionals Job Postings Between 2013-2018 
 
Joanna Thielen 
Biomedical Engineering Librarian 
Art, Architecture & Engineering Library 
University of Michigan 
Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America 
Email: jethiele@umich.edu 
 
Amy Neeser 
Consulting & Outreach Lead 
Research IT 
University of California Berkeley 
Berkeley, California, United States of America 
Email: aneeser@berkeley.edu 
 
Received: 1 Mar. 2020 
 
 
 
 
Accepted: 18 June 2020 
 
 
 2020 Thielen and Neeser. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons‐
Attribution‐Noncommercial‐Share Alike License 4.0 International (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-
sa/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is 
properly attributed, not used for commercial purposes, and, if transformed, the resulting work is redistributed under 
the same or similar license to this one. 
 
Data Availability: Neeser, A., & Thielen, J. (2020). Making job postings more equitable: evidence-based 
recommendations from an analysis of data professionals job postings between 2013-2018 (V2) [dataset]. UC 
Berkeley. https://doi.org/10.6078/D1K419 
 
DOI: 10.18438/eblip29674 
 
 
Abstract 
 
Objective - Over the last decade, many academic libraries have hired data professionals to offer 
research data services. As these positions often require different types of experience than traditional 
librarian positions, there is an increased interest in hiring professionals from outside the typical 
library and information science (LIS) pipeline. More broadly, there has also been an increased interest 
in academic libraries and higher education to incorporate the principles and practices of diversity, 
Evidence Based Library and Information Practice 2020, 15.3 
 
104 
 
equity, inclusion, and accessibility (DEI&A) into their work. These phenomena allow an opportunity 
to examine the growing area of data professionals and library hiring practices through the lens of 
DEI&A. Data was collected from 180 data professional job positions, including education, 
experiences, and skills, to better understand the evolving and complex landscape of data 
professionals and to provide evidence based recommendations regarding how the profession can 
enact meaningful and lasting change in the areas of DEI&A. 
 
Methods - The qualifications and responsibilities listed in data professional job postings from 2013 to 
2018 were examined. Prior to analyzing the job postings, a codebook of 43 variables was developed. 
The 177 data professional job postings (corresponding to 180 positions) were independently 
analyzed, noting the presence of each variable, including the locations and the degrees of complexity 
sought. After coding, discrepancies were mutually resolved. Overall, the coding process had 94% 
intercoder agreement, which indicates a high level of agreement. 
 
Results - Over one-third of postings (n = 63, 35%) did not use the word “librarian” in the job title. 
Eighty-eight percent (n = 159) required a Master’s in LIS degree, but 67% (n = 119) also accepted an 
equivalent degree. Over half of the positions (n = 108, 60%) were also looking for an additional 
degree, most frequently a graduate degree. The median salary of the positions listing a quantitative 
value was $57,000; however, this value may not be accurate because only 26% of job positions (n = 47) 
gave a quantitative salary. From the research data management skills mentioned, general data 
management (n = 155, 86%), data repositories (n = 122, 68%), and data curation (n = 101, 56%) 
appeared most frequently. Libraries were also looking for traditional LIS skills and experiences, 
including instruction (n = 138, 77%), consultation (n = 121, 67%), and a public services perspective (n = 
69, 38%). 
 
Conclusion - The results show that academic libraries are trying to recruit candidates from outside 
the traditional academic library pipeline. Research data activities (a non-traditional area for LIS) and 
traditional LIS areas were both frequently mentioned. Overall, these job positions should be written 
through a more intentional lens of DEI&A. This would help to make data professional positions more 
diverse and inclusive, while also helping academic libraries to reach their goal of recruiting outside of 
LIS. A set of concrete DEI&A recommendations are provided that are applicable for writing all 
library positions, so that readers can put these results into action and enact meaningful change within 
the profession. 
  
 
Introduction 
 
Over the last decade, an increasing number of 
academic libraries have hired data professionals 
to offer research data services (RDS) to facilitate 
the advancement of research. Data professionals 
help researchers to “address the full data 
lifecycle, including the data management plan, 
digital curation (selection, preservation, 
maintenance, and archiving), and metadata 
creation and conversion” (Tenopir, Sandusky, 
Allard, & Birch, 2013, p. 70). These positions 
often require different types of experience than 
traditional librarian positions, which can create 
an interest in hiring professionals from outside 
of the typical library and information science 
(LIS) pipeline. Accepting a variety of academic 
backgrounds and professional experiences 
naturally increases other forms of diversity 
because more types of people will apply. 
Furthermore, there is an increased interest in 
academic libraries and higher education more 
broadly to incorporate principles and practices 
of diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility 
 
105 
 
(DEI&A) into their work. Examining the 
landscape of data professionals working in 
academic libraries and formulating 
recommendations for action can help increase 
diversity in these positions, reducing disparities 
within the profession and its institutions. The 
consequence of perpetuating the status quo is to 
worsen the disparities amongst underprivileged 
and underrepresented groups. As hiring 
managers, search committee members, tenure 
review committee members, advocates, and 
conversation starters, everyone has a role to play 
in making our profession more equitable and 
inclusive for a more diverse groups of 
professionals. DEI&A is much more than simply 
having a library or institutional statement at the 
bottom of a job posting. DEI&A principles and 
practices should inform every aspect of a job 
posting. This evidence based research study 
presents the data collected from a deductive 
thematic analysis of 177 data professional job 
postings, including education, experiences, and 
skills, to better understand the complex 
landscape of data professionals. The findings are 
used to create a set of recommendations for how 
DEI&A principles can be incorporated into any 
academic library job posting so that the 
profession can enact meaningful and lasting 
change. 
 
Literature Review 
 
Research Data Services in Academic Libraries 
 
The need for academic libraries to provide RDS 
due to the emergence of more data intensive 
research, data management mandates from 
funding agencies, and other factors, has been 
well-established in the literature (Tenopir et al., 
2013). Further, RDS is listed as a top trend in 
academic libraries in both 2016 and 2018 by the 
Association of College and Research Libraries 
(ACRL) (ACRL Research Planning and Review 
Committee, 2016; ACRL Research Planning and 
Review Committee, 2018). As RDS is an 
emerging area within academic librarianship, 
the literature consists mostly of case studies, 
focused primarily on assessing the needs of 
campus researchers and implementing these 
services, as summarized by Tenopir, Kaufman, 
Sandusky, and Pollock (2019). While this 
literature provides valuable information about 
researcher needs and the implementation of 
RDS services, it provides little information on 
the emerging sub-discipline of data 
professionals. There is a need to capture data 
about the responsibilities, qualifications, and 
other information about data professional 
positions, such as education, experiences, and 
skills. 
 
DEI&A in Academic Libraries and Higher 
Education 
 
Academic libraries have a long history of 
valuing DEI&A. Examples include research on 
accessibility and diversity of library websites 
(Yoon, Hulscher, & Dols, 2016) and LIS student 
groups advocating for DEI&A inclusion in LIS 
curriculum (Jardine & Zerhusen, 2015). There 
are several examples of conferences and events 
on this topic, such as the Conference on 
Inclusion and Diversity in Library & 
Information Science (https://cidlis.umd.edu/). 
Other national LIS conferences, such as the 
Digital Library Federation and Research Data 
Access and Preservation Association, have 
tracks or specific foci on these topics. Further, 
national groups such as the American Library 
Association and ACRL have offices and 
committees to ensure the prioritization of 
DEI&A. 
 
Similarly, higher education institutions have 
also been incorporating DEI&A into their values 
and work, as seen throughout professional 
publications such as Inside Higher Ed (Willis, 
2017) and the Chronicle of Higher Education 
(Brown, 2019). Professional associations such as 
Educause (n.d.) have identified DEI&A as a 
critical priority and higher education 
conferences such as the Leadership in Higher 
Education 
(https://www.magnapubs.com/leadership-in-
higher-education-conference/) are likewise 
focusing on these themes. Additionally, 
 
106 
 
individual universities have incorporated these 
principles into many facets of the institution, 
such as the University of Michigan’s Diversity, 
Equity, and Inclusion Certificate (n.d.) for 
graduate students and the University of 
California Berkeley’s (2018) strategic plan. 
However, one area that has received less 
attention from the DEI&A perspective is the job 
search process in academia, which is opaque 
and favors those on the inside (Fernandes et al., 
2020). 
 
Job Posting Analyses to Create a Landscape of 
Data Professionals 
 
Job postings describe “the duties and 
responsibilities ... experience, education, skills, 
knowledge, or other attributes required for the 
job; and the hiring organization, salary range, 
and other benefits” (Kim & Angnakoon, 2016, p. 
327). Academic libraries can also use job 
postings to articulate their needs and priorities, 
especially for areas of expansion such as RDS. 
 
Subsets of RDS job postings have been examined 
via content analysis. Si, Zhuang, Xing, and Guo 
(2013) compared the core competencies and 
duties of scientific data specialists in 46 job 
postings to the current curricula in 38 LIS 
programs. They found that most LIS curricula 
train students in the basics of data curation, but 
more specialized areas were limited. Kim, 
Warga, and Moen (2013) studied job postings for 
digital curation positions and developed a set of 
competencies for digital curation 
responsibilities, which were used to create 
curricula in digital curation and data 
management. Xia and Wang (2014) visualized 
keyword and phrase occurrences of 167 job 
postings for social science data librarians from 
2005-2012. Chen and Zhang (2017) analyzed 70 
data management professionals’ positions, from 
January to April 2015 using word frequency 
analysis, finding that 27% of postings mentioned 
a Master’s degree in Library and Information 
Science (MLIS). 
Thematic Analysis as a Research Method 
 
Thematic analyses “move beyond counting 
explicit words or phrases and focus on 
identifying and describing both implicit and 
explicit ideas within the data” (Guest, 
MacQueen, & Namey, 2012, p. 10). This method 
yields richer results than word frequency 
analysis because it can “captur[e] the 
complexities of meaning within a textual data 
set” (Guest et al., 2012, p. 11). This methodology 
has been previously applied to the analysis of 
job postings within academic libraries. Hall-Ellis 
(2005; 2006) used this confirmatory method to 
track changing expectations and requirements 
for entry-level cataloguer positions and 
managerial cataloguer positions. In addition to 
coding the appearance of predetermined 
variables in the job postings, Hall-Ellis (2005; 
2006) also coded for the complexity of each 
variable, which cannot be done with word 
frequency analysis. A more rigorous analysis of 
job postings within RDS using thematic analysis 
is lacking from the literature, with Chen and 
Zhang (2017, p. 22) noting that the results of 
their study shows “a need for a follow-up study 
to monitor the development of th[is] emerging 
job area.” 
 
Aims 
 
This research project aims to answer the 
following research questions: 
 
1. What are the most frequently occurring 
qualifications (required and preferred) 
and responsibilities for data 
professional positions? 
a. Specifically, what education and 
experiences occur most 
frequently? 
b. What research data activities 
occur most frequently? 
c. 
What other responsibilities and 
skills occur most frequently? 
2. What is the median salary and salary 
range of data professional positions? 
 
107 
 
Methods 
 
This research study uses deductive thematic 
analysis to examine data professional job 
postings that were posted from January 1, 2013 
to June 30, 2018. These job postings were 
gathered from the following electronic mailing 
lists: 1) ACRL Science & Technology Section 
(n.d), 2) Code4Lib jobs list (n.d.), 3) Digital 
Library Federation Job Board (n.d.), 4) 
International Association of Social Science 
Information Services & Technology jobs portal 
(n.d.) and 5) Research Data Access and 
Preservation Association (n.d.). In addition, 
DataCure (an electronic mailing list on Google 
Groups) was analyzed for job postings; note that 
the viewer must be a member before accessing 
the list but anyone is allowed to join. These data 
sources were chosen because they are known 
nationally, attract job postings from a diverse 
pool of academic libraries, and provide access to 
job postings during the chosen time frame. 
 
In some cases, the job announcement did not 
contain the complete job posting. In these cases, 
links to external websites (usually the university 
jobs portal), the Internet Archive WayBack 
Machine (n.d.), Google searches, and personal 
communications were used to locate the 
complete job posting. Seven job postings were 
excluded from this study because the full 
posting could not be located. 
 
Job postings were first evaluated based on the 
job title. If a job title referenced data or RDS, the 
job posting was downloaded for further 
analysis. Postings were then reviewed to 
determine if they met the following four 
inclusion criteria: 
 
1. Full-time, permanent positions 
2. Located in an academic library  
3. Located within the US 
4. Primarily focused on providing RDS, 
which was defined as 50% or more of 
job responsibilities devoted to these 
services. The following description of 
RDS from Cox and Pinfield (2014) was 
used to determine if the job position 
fulfilled this criterion and positions that 
focused on library or administrative 
data were excluded: 
 
[RDS] consists of a number of different 
activities and processes associated with 
the data lifecycle, involving the design 
and creation of data, storage, security, 
preservation, retrieval, sharing, and 
reuse, all taking into account technical 
capabilities, ethical considerations, legal 
issues and governance frameworks. 
(Cox & Pinfield, 2014, p. 300) 
 
Once it was concluded that a job met the four 
inclusion criteria, metadata about the job 
posting was recorded, including the university 
name, job title, and posting date (see Appendix 
A for metadata on the job postings). In total, 236 
full data professional job postings were 
gathered. However, this corpus contained 
duplicates. Job postings from the same 
university posted within 12 months of each 
other were targeted as possible duplicates. 
Several factors were scrutinized to determine if 
the postings were duplicates of the same 
position, including posting date, job title, 
responsibilities, and qualifications. If the 
postings had 25% or more difference in their 
responsibilities or qualifications, they were not 
considered duplicates and each posting was 
kept in the corpus. Potential duplicate postings 
were reviewed individually to determine if the 
posting should be included or excluded. 
Determinations were then discussed and 
agreement was reached on the inclusion or 
exclusion for each posting. If postings were 
duplicated, the posting with the most recent 
posting date was kept. In total, 59 postings were 
removed as duplicates, leaving 177 job postings 
corresponding to 180 job positions (3 job 
postings were for 2 positions). 
 
To determine patterns in the qualifications and 
responsibilities for data professionals, a 
confirmatory approach was taken using a 
deductive thematic analysis methodology. A 
 
108 
 
codebook of variables and attributes for each 
variable was determined prior to analyzing the 
job positions. The codebook was based on Hall-
Ellis’ (2005; 2006) thematic analyses of 
cataloguing librarian job postings. Appendix B 
shows the complete codebook of 43 variables 
and corresponding attributes. Each variable in 
the codebook was operationally defined in order 
to avoid ambiguity. Descriptions of when each 
variable should be used and should not be used 
were included. Variables were grouped into 
three categories: 1) education, experience, and 
salary; 2) research data activities; and 3) other 
responsibilities and skills. For each of the 43 
variables, the attribute of location in the job 
posting was coded (see Table 1 for list of 
attributes). If the variable was mentioned in 
multiple locations in the job positions, only one 
location was recorded, based on the following 
hierarchy: required qualifications > preferred 
qualifications > responsibilities > description. 
For example, if the variable “data management 
plan” appeared in the responsibilities and 
preferred qualifications sections, it was coded as 
preferred qualifications. For the variables in the 
research data activities category and most 
variables in the other responsibilities or skills 
category, an interval scale correlating to the 
stated degree of complexity sought was also 
coded (Table 1). The codebook was reviewed by 
two academic data professionals (who were not 
affiliated with the project) and their feedback 
was incorporated to ensure that the variables 
were an accurate and thorough representation of 
the responsibilities and qualifications sought for 
data professionals. 
 
All job postings were coded independently to 
ensure consistency and reliability. Initially, a 
small corpus of 15 job postings was coded and 
the codebook was refined to define variables 
more clearly, add additional variables, eliminate 
unneeded variables, and revise attributes. After 
these revisions, the entire corpus of 177 job 
postings was coded. Coding discrepancies were 
resolved through discussion. Coding reflected a 
high level of intercoder agreement; percent 
agreement was 94%, which is higher than the 
threshold of 80% for good agreement (Guest et 
al., 2012).
 
 
Table 1 
Attributes for the Variable “Data Storage” a 
Variable = 
Data Storage 
 
 
 
 
 
Attributes 
 
 
 
 
Location in 
the job 
posting 
Required 
qualifications 
(minimum 
requirements; 
basic 
requirements) 
Preferred 
qualifications 
(Desired 
qualifications) 
Responsibilities 
(Duties) 
Description 
Not applicable 
Degree of 
complexity 
sought 
Experience 
(ability; 
demonstrated 
ability; 
aptitude) 
Knowledge 
(understanding; 
competent; 
competence) 
Familiarity 
Implied 
Not applicable 
a Synonyms for each attribute are shown in parenthesis. The full codebook is in Appendix B. 
 
109 
 
Table 2 
The Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education for the Job Positions (n = 180) (Shown in 
Descending Order of Institutional Size) 
Carnegie Classification 
n 
Doctoral Universities: Very High Research Activity 
146 
Doctoral Universities: High Research Activity  
19 
Doctoral/Professional Schools 
1 
Master's Colleges & Universities: Larger Programs 
2 
Baccalaureate Colleges: Arts & Sciences Focus 
8 
Special Focus Four-Year: Medical Schools & Centers 
3 
Special Focus Four-Year: Other Health Professions Schools 
1 
 
 
Results 
 
Metadata about the Job Positions 
 
The entire corpus contained 177 job postings, 
corresponding to 180 job positions. All of the 
following analyses were based on the number of 
job positions. The number of job positions 
posted each year over the 2013-2017 time frame 
remained relatively consistent, ranging from 25 
to 38 positions. The positions were 
geographically dispersed across the US, spread 
out across 37 states and Washington D.C. 
 
Most positions were located at doctoral-granting 
universities with very high research activity (n = 
146, 81%), based on The Carnegie Classification 
of Institutions of Higher Education (Indiana 
University, 2017). The breakdown of job 
positions by the Carnegie Classification of the 
institutions is shown in Table 2. 
 
From the 180 positions, there were 119 unique 
job titles (job titles were analyzed based on 
exactly how they appeared in the job posting). 
The four job titles occurring most frequently 
were: 
 
• 
Data Services Librarian (n = 23, 13%) 
• 
Data Curation Librarian (n = 7, 4%) 
• 
Research Data Management Librarian (n 
= 6, 3%) 
• 
Data Librarian (n = 6, 3%) 
 
Further, over one-third (n = 63, 35%) of the job 
titles did not include the word “librarian”, 
instead using terms such as specialist, 
consultant, informationist, curator, coordinator, 
and analyst. 
 
Education and Experience 
 
Of the 180 positions, almost 90% (n = 159) listed 
an MLIS degree as a qualification (Figure 1). 
 
However, over 70% of positions (n = 132, 73%) 
accepted an equivalent degree in lieu of an MLIS 
degree and all mentions of an equivalent degree 
were located in the required qualifications. One 
position listed this qualification as “MLIS degree 
or equivalent advanced degree in the social 
sciences.” Figures 2 and 3 show the level and 
disciplines mentioned for these equivalent 
degrees (note that a position could list multiple 
levels or disciplines). The most frequent 
equivalent degree level sought was an advanced 
 
110 
 
 
Figure 1 
The location of an MLIS as a qualification for the job position (n = 180). 
 
 
 
Figure 2  
The levels of equivalent degrees mentioned. Synonyms for advanced were graduate and professional; a 
synonym for doctorate was terminal. Note that a position could list multiple degree levels. 
 
 
111 
 
 
 
Figure 3  
The disciplines of equivalent degrees mentioned. Synonyms for relevant were related, appropriate, and 
comparable. Note that a position could list multiple degree disciplines. 
 
 
degree (n = 73) and the most frequent discipline 
of the equivalent degree was relevant (n = 47). 
While the term “relevant” is ambiguous, it does 
reflect the terms used in the job postings. 
 
In addition to an MLIS or equivalent degree, 
60% of job positions (n = 108) wanted the 
candidate to have an additional degree (either 
undergraduate or graduate). For example, a 
preferred qualification for one job position was 
an “additional relevant graduate degree.” The 
majority (78%, n = 84) of these additional 
degrees were listed as a preferred qualification. 
As for the level of the degree, the majority 
wanted an advanced degree (n = 65; Figure 4). 
 
When an additional degree was mentioned, 
discipline(s) of that degree were sometimes also 
mentioned. Of the 108 positions that listed an 
additional degree as a qualification, the science, 
technology, engineering and math (STEM; n = 
59) and social sciences (n = 47) disciplines were 
mentioned most frequently (a position could list 
multiple disciplines and the complete 
disciplinary list is shown in Table 3). 
Table 3 
Disciplines Listed for an Additional Degree as a 
Qualification b 
Discipline 
n 
STEM 
59 
Social Sciences 
47 
Data Science, Data Intensive Field, and 
others.  
27 
Business 
7 
Relevant 
7 
Health Sciences 
5 
Arts & Humanities 
4 
b Note that a position could list multiple 
disciplines. Synonyms for relevant were related, 
appropriate, and comparable. 
 
 
112 
 
 
Figure 4 
The level of an additional degree mentioned. Synonyms for advanced were graduate and professional; a 
synonym for doctorate was terminal. Note that a position could list multiple degree levels. 
 
 
Of the 117 positions with the word “librarian” in 
the title, 62% (n = 73) accepted an MLIS degree 
or equivalent degree, while 36% (n = 42) only 
accepted an MLIS degree (Figure 5). Conversely, 
of the 63 postings that did not use the word 
“librarian” in the job title, 65% (n = 41) accepted 
an MLIS or equivalent degree and 2% (n = 1) 
only accepted an MLIS degree. 
 
In addition to educational qualifications, many 
positions were seeking professional experience. 
Almost half (n = 87, 48%) wanted a candidate 
who had previous academic library experience, 
with those mentions split between required (n = 
39) and preferred qualifications (n = 48). Figure 6 
shows the length of academic library experience 
listed in the job positions, with almost half (n = 
43) not specifying a length of time. In terms of 
previous experience with research data, 60% (n = 
108) of positions wanted a candidate with this 
type of experience, most frequently naming it a 
required qualification (n = 85). Only a few 
positions (n = 21) listed a length of time for this 
experience, with 3 to 5 years (n = 11) being the 
most frequent length of time. For example, one 
position listed a required qualification as 
“minimum of three years professional 
experience working with large research datasets 
and/or familiarity with major data resources.” 
 
In addition to professional experience, about 
one-fifth of the job positions (n = 35, 19%) were 
looking for additional academic experience. 
Almost two-thirds of mentions were for lab or 
research experience (n = 23), while the remaining 
one-third of the mentions were for significant 
coursework or academic background in a 
discipline (n = 12; note that a position could list 
multiple types of academic experiences). All 
mentions of additional academic experience 
were in the required or preferred qualifications. 
While these terms for academic experiences are 
nebulous, they mirror the terms used in job 
postings. Examples of these qualifications are 
 
113 
 
 
Figure 5 
Degree requirements for positions with the word “librarian” in the job title (n = 117) and without the 
word “librarian” in the job title (n = 63). 
 
 
 
Figure 6 
The length of experience in an academic library listed as a qualification (n = 180). 
 
114 
 
 
“research laboratory experience” as a preferred 
qualification and “coursework or experience 
leading to knowledge of the principles and 
practices of data curation and long-term digital 
preservation” as a required qualification. 
 
Salary 
 
Almost half (n = 77, 43%) of the positions did not 
mention salary. When salary was mentioned, 
about a third (n = 57, 32%) only used descriptive 
words such as commensurate or competitive 
(Figure 7). A quarter (n = 47, 25%) gave a 
quantitative salary value, with or without 
descriptive words. The range of salaries listed 
was from $40,000 to $157,000, with a median 
salary of $57,000, and over half (n = 25) clustered 
between $54,000 - 68,000 (Figure 8). 
 
Research Data Activities 
 
Of the 180 job positions, the most common 
research data activities mentioned were general 
data management (n = 154, 86%), data repository 
(n = 122, 68%), data curation (n = 101, 56%), data 
discovery (n = 97, 54%) and data documentation 
(n = 96, 53%; Figures 9 and 10 and Appendix C). 
General data management was most commonly 
mentioned in the preferred qualifications (n = 
73) and the degree of complexity sought most 
frequently was “experience” (n = 58, 37%). The 
variable “general data management” is vague, 
but it reflects the actual terminology used in job 
postings. For example, one job position listed 
“assists faculty and graduate students with data 
management” as a responsibility; this is also an 
example of “implied” as the degree of 
complexity for this variable. In contrast, the 
more specific variable “data management plans” 
was mentioned in over 40% of positions (n = 76, 
42%), most commonly mentioned in the 
required qualifications section (n = 24). 
 
“Data repository” was mentioned in more than 
two-thirds of positions (n = 122, 67%). This was 
the variable with the highest number of 
occurrences in the required qualifications (n = 
52); but it was also mentioned frequently in the 
responsibilities (n = 33) and preferred 
qualifications (n = 31). As for the degree of 
complexity sought, “experience” (n = 34) and 
“knowledge” (n = 32) were most common.
 
 
Figure 7 
How salary was described in the job positions (n = 180). 
 
115 
 
 
Figure 8 
Histogram of salary values (n = 47). If a salary range was given for the position, the median value was 
used. 
 
Different types of data analysis (general, 
statistical, spatial, or qualitative) were often 
mentioned in the job positions. In total, at least 1 
type of data analysis was listed in over 60% of 
positions (n = 111; note that multiple types of 
data analysis could be listed in a position). 
“General data analysis”, the variable used when 
a specific type of data analysis was not 
mentioned, was mentioned in over 40% of the 
positions (n = 78, 43%). Over half of these 
mentions occurred in the required qualifications 
section (n = 42, 53%). Additionally, half of these 
mentions were seeking “experience” for the 
degree of complexity (n = 39). For example, one 
job position stated, as a required qualification, 
“knowledge of quantitative data analysis 
applications.” Statistical (n = 76, 42%), spatial (n 
= 46, 26%), and qualitative (n = 36, 20%) data 
analysis were also mentioned in the job 
positions. Statistical analysis (n = 45, 59%) was 
most frequently listed as a required 
qualification, while spatial (n = 24, 52%) and 
qualitative data analysis (n = 18, 50%) were most 
frequently listed as preferred qualifications. As 
for the degree of complexity sought, all 3 types 
of analysis were most frequently seeking 
“experience” (statistical analysis: n = 45; spatial 
analysis: n = 24; qualitative analysis: n = 21). 
 
Other Responsibilities and Skills 
 
About one-third (n = 60) of the job positions had 
faculty status; two-thirds of those with faculty 
status (n = 40) were also tenure-track. The 
requirement to research and publish was 
mentioned in about one-third of the positions (n 
= 55, 31%), most commonly listed in the 
responsibilities section (n = 28). Having a public 
or customer service perspective was mentioned 
in 38% of the postings (n = 69), most frequently 
mentioned as a required qualification (n = 46, 
67%). 
 
Instruction was mentioned in over three-fourths 
of positions (n = 138, 76%). Although mentioned 
in all 4 main locations within a job posting, 
mentions of instruction were most frequently 
mentioned in the required qualifications (n = 49) 
and responsibilities (n = 46). This variable listed 
“experience” as the most common degree of 
complexity sought (n = 81, 59%).
 
116 
 
 
Figure 9 
Summary of the degree of complexity sought. Raw values are shown in Appendix C. 
 
 
Figure 10 
Summary of B) location in the job posting for 17 research data activities (n = 180). 
Raw values are shown in Appendix C. 
 
 
117 
 
Consultation was mentioned in over two-thirds 
of the positions (n = 121, 67%), most frequently 
in the responsibilities section (n = 93). 
Additionally, 85% of these mentions listed 
“implied” as the degree of complexity sought (n 
= 103), meaning that a specific degree of 
complexity was not mentioned. For example, 
one job position stated in the description that the 
incumbent will “provid[e] training and 
consulting services.” 
 
More than 40% of the positions were focused on 
meeting research data needs within specific 
disciplines (n = 75, 42%). This variable was most 
commonly listed in the responsibilities section (n 
= 42, 23%). Of those focused on specific 
disciplines, the most common discipline was the 
social sciences (n = 32; Table 4 shows the 
complete disciplinary breakdown). 
 
Table 4 
Disciplines of Job Positions that focused on the 
Research Data Needs of Specific Disciplines c 
Discipline 
n 
Social Sciences 
32 
STEM 
22 
Health Sciences  
20 
Business 
7 
Arts & Humanities 
4 
c If specific departments were listed, they were 
grouped into their broader discipline (multiple 
disciplines could be listed for a position). 
 
Additionally, 28% (n = 51) of the job positions 
were the liaison to 1 or more departments or 
units on campus; this variable was most 
commonly listed in the responsibilities section (n 
= 40, 22%). Of those with liaison responsibilities, 
three-fourths (n = 37, 73%) listed specific 
departments or disciplines (Table 5) and the 
remaining positions had a department(s) 
assigned upon hiring. Of the 51 positions listing 
liaison responsibilities, over 85% (n = 44) also 
had instruction duties, as opposed to 72% of 
positions (n = 93) without liaison duties. 
 
Table 5 
Disciplines for Job Positions that included 
Liaison Responsibilities to One or More 
Department or Unit d 
Discipline 
n 
STEM 
14 
Social Sciences 
13 
Business 
8 
Health Sciences 
4 
Administrative Units 
3 
Data Science 
2 
Arts & Humanities 
1 
d If specific departments were listed, they were 
grouped into their broader discipline (multiple 
disciplines could be listed for a position). 
 
The variable of DEI&A related to the position, 
not the university or library, was mentioned in 
less than half of the positions (n = 75, 42%). 
These statements were most often included in 
the required qualifications section (n = 51), 
followed by the preferred qualifications section 
(n = 15). As these statements most often referred 
to a candidate’s commitment to or 
understanding of the importance of DEI&A, the 
degree of complexity was not coded. For 
example, one required qualification was a 
“commitment to supporting and working in a 
multicultural and diverse environment.” Figure 
11 shows that this variable was included in more 
job positions over time.
 
 
118 
 
 
Figure 11 
Number of occurrences of DEI&A statements relating to the position over time. Positions from 2018 were 
not included because they were only gathered for half of that year. 
 
 
Discussion 
 
What are the Required and Preferred 
Qualifications and Responsibilities for Data 
Professional Positions? 
 
Overall, the education, experiences, and skills 
mentioned throughout these data professional 
job positions show that this sub-discipline of 
academic librarianship is looking for a mixture 
of traditional (instruction, consultation, and 
others) and non-traditional areas (general data 
management, data repositories, and others) for 
LIS. While the skills and experiences of those 
within the academic library pipeline are still 
sought, this mixture indicates an eagerness to 
recruit candidates from outside of the traditional 
LIS pipeline; this is a positive sign towards 
diversifying academic librarianship. Therefore, 
data professional positions are ripe to accept a 
variety of academic backgrounds and 
professional experiences, which naturally attract 
diverse candidates and thereby increase other 
forms of diversity. 
 
 
 
Education and Experience 
 
In the degree qualifications, over 70% (n = 132, 
67%) accepted an equivalent degree in lieu of 
the MLIS degree. However, most positions were 
still seeking candidates with a degree beyond a 
Bachelor’s (n = 104). Interestingly, for these 
equivalent degrees, most commonly the term 
“relevant” (n = 47) was used to describe the 
discipline or the discipline was not specified (n = 
41). If a specific discipline was mentioned, STEM 
was the most common (n = 35). This indicates 
that libraries are seeking candidates with 
graduate degrees from all disciplines for their 
data professional positions, allowing for a 
diverse set of backgrounds and thus more 
diverse candidates. Many libraries were seeking 
candidates possessing an additional degree (n = 
108, 60%), most frequently mentioned as a 
preferred qualification (n = 84). Again, if a 
specific discipline was mentioned, STEM was 
most common (n = 59). These degree 
qualifications are troubling from a DEI&A lens 
because many inequities in our society prevent 
 
119 
 
individuals from obtaining a graduate degree 
much less multiple graduate degrees (Soto & 
Yao, 2010). In 2018, only 10.2% of the US adult 
population had a Master’s degree and only 2.1% 
had a doctoral degree (Oh and Kim, 2020). 
Instead of listing these degrees by default, an 
analysis should be done to demonstrate how the 
degree(s) would help the candidate to fulfill the 
job responsibilities (Thielen & Neeser, 2019). 
Also, see if an institution offers any benefits 
(such as tuition reimbursement) that would 
allow a candidate to earn another degree while 
working, and if so include them in the job 
posting. 
 
The term “data intensive field” was often used 
to describe the discipline of an equivalent (n = 
30) or additional degree (n = 27). This term is 
often used in RDS. It is hypothesized that 
libraries are using this term to denote that they 
would like a candidate with research data 
experience but do not want to list specific 
disciplines. However, from a DEI&A lens, this 
term is subjective, perhaps leaving a candidate 
unsure if their degree meets this qualification. It 
is suggested to avoid this ambiguous term in job 
postings. Further, individuals from 
underrepresented groups are less likely to apply 
to positions if they do not meet all of the 
qualifications (Mohr, 2014), so including 
ambiguous jargon will make them less likely to 
apply. 
 
Over a third of the data professional positions (n 
= 63) did not use the word “librarian” in the job 
title; this may impact the degree qualifications. 
Of the positions that include this word in the job 
title (n = 117), 36% (n = 42) only accept an MLIS 
degree. Conversely, of the positions without this 
word in the job title (n = 63), 2% (n = 1) only 
accept an MLIS degree. The difference in degree 
qualifications is an excellent example of how 
libraries are writing job positions that seek to 
diversify this sub-discipline. 
 
Another indication that many libraries are 
looking to recruit outside of the LIS pipeline is 
that of the positions that wanted candidates to 
have previous academic library experience (n = 
87), only 45% of these mentions (n = 39) occurred 
in the required qualifications section. 
 
In addition to degrees, previous experiences 
mentioned in the job positions also indicate an 
emphasis on areas traditionally considered 
outside the scope of LIS. Experience working 
with research data was a common qualification 
(n = 108), most frequently listed as a required 
qualification. Finally, it is important to note that 
almost 20% of the positions (n = 35) mentioned 
additional academic experiences (lab or research 
experience, academic background, and others) 
as a required or preferred qualification. This 
could be a way for a candidate to demonstrate 
knowledge of a particular area without having 
an academic degree. Asking for these types of 
additional academic experiences, instead of an 
additional degree, is another excellent way to 
incorporate DEI&A principles into a job posting. 
 
Research Data Activities 
 
Overall, the research data activities that were 
most frequently mentioned in the data 
professional job positions show that this sub-
discipline of academic librarianship values areas 
traditionally outside of LIS (such as general data 
management, data repositories, and various 
types of data analysis). General data 
management (n = 155) was the second most 
commonly mentioned variable in the job 
positions, second to the MLIS degree (n = 159). 
 
Unsurprisingly, general data management was 
the most frequently mentioned research data 
activities variable (n = 155). Interestingly, 
although general data management was most 
commonly mentioned in the preferred 
qualifications (n = 73), “experience” (n = 58) was 
the most frequent degree of complexity for this 
variable. This suggests that libraries want a 
candidate with experience managing research 
data, but know that it may not be feasible to ask 
for this as a required qualification. Data 
repository is the variable with the highest 
number of occurrences in the required 
 
120 
 
qualifications section (n = 51). This shows that 
there is much interest in hiring candidates with 
these skills and, therefore, offering these services 
on campus. Overall, at least 1 of the 4 types of 
data analysis were mentioned in over 60% of 
positions (n = 111; note that a position could list 
multiple types). Assisting patrons with data 
analysis is not a traditional area of LIS, but this 
result indicates that libraries consider this an 
unmet need that they are trying to fulfill on their 
campuses. 
 
Academic libraries are seeking to hire specialist 
data professionals as well as generalist data 
professionals; 42% of the positions (n = 75) were 
seeking to hire a specialist data professional, 
while the other 58% (n = 104) were seeking to 
hire a generalist. The occurrence of these 
specialist data professional positions is another 
indication that libraries are trying to recruit 
candidates from outside the traditional LIS 
pipeline. 
 
Other Responsibilities and Skills 
 
Many of the common variables in this section 
need further explanation or different 
terminology entirely in order to recruit 
candidates from outside of LIS. Public or 
customer service perspective was mentioned in 
almost 40% of the postings (n = 69), with two-
thirds of those mentions in the required 
qualifications section. Public or customer service 
is not necessarily a tenant of other fields like it is 
in LIS, so providing further context to this 
requirement would give candidates a better 
understanding of what this qualification entails 
and why it is valued in this context. 
 
Liaison duties are another example of library 
jargon in these positions. Almost 30% of 
positions (n = 51) had liaison duties. It is 
unlikely that someone outside of LIS would 
understand what the term “liaison” means. 
Instead of saying “liaison to the Political Science 
Department”, this could be rephrased as 
“Librarian for the Political Science Department.” 
Small changes like this could have a huge 
impact on whether candidates outside of LIS 
decide to apply for a position. Additionally, of 
those listing liaison duties, three-fourths (n = 37) 
listed being a liaison to a specific department(s). 
While listing these departments adds specificity 
to the job position, it also may discourage 
applicants who do not have an academic 
background or experience with the subject 
area(s). Writing something like “departments 
will be assigned based on the candidate's 
background and interests,” will help to recruit a 
more diverse candidate pool. 
 
Instruction was mentioned in three-fourths of 
the positions (n = 138, 76%) and consultation 
was mentioned in two-thirds of the positions (n 
= 121, 67%). Both of these activities are common 
across job sectors within the LIS profession. The 
high number of mentions of these two variables 
shows that academic libraries, while embracing 
new ways of engaging with patrons, believe that 
these traditional means of engagement are still 
vital parts of the services they offer on campus. 
 
It is encouraging to see that the mentions of 
DEI&A have increased during the time period 
studied (Figure 11). However, there is still room 
for improvement because, over the 5 years in 
this study, less than half of the positions (n = 75, 
42%) included this variable. DEI&A related to 
the position was the focus, as opposed to generic 
statements about the university or library, 
because this was felt to be a demonstration of 
commitment to these principles rather than an 
Human Resources requirement. Having a 
required qualification for all job positions 
related to DEI&A could concretize academic 
libraries’ commitment to these principles and 
practices. 
 
What is the Median Salary and Salary Range of 
Data Professional Positions? 
 
This study cannot give a definitive answer to 
this research question because only 26% (n = 47) 
of the job positions listed a quantitative salary 
value. Most frequently, salary was not 
mentioned (n = 77, 43%). An additional third of 
 
121 
 
the job positions (n = 57) only used qualitative 
descriptors for salary such as “competitive” or 
“commensurate”. However, of the 47 positions 
listing a salary value or range, the median salary 
was $57,000. 
 
Not mentioning salary or only providing 
qualitative salary descriptors is problematic 
from a DEI&A lens. This practice favors those 
already working in academic libraries as they 
will have inside access to and knowledge about 
common practices and resources, 
disadvantaging recent LIS graduates, and those 
outside of the traditional LIS pipeline. For 
example, those already working in academic 
libraries may have access to internal salary 
documents and databases or be able to ask their 
professional networks about salary information 
and practices. It also favors those working in the 
part of the country where the job is located, 
because they may have an idea of data 
professional salaries in their geographic area. 
For example, a competitive salary at a university 
in San Francisco, California will be very 
different from a competitive salary at a 
university in rural Michigan. Furthermore, these 
practices could hinder a candidate’s ability to 
effectively negotiate salary and individuals from 
underrepresented groups are less likely to 
negotiate salaries (Silva & Galbraith, 2018). 
Listing a salary range indicates that candidates 
can negotiate; not doing so furthers inequity 
between those who already hold privilege from 
those who do not. 
 
Additionally, the salary values listed for the job 
positions may not be an accurate reflection of 
the person hired for a position. A new 
employee’s salary could be higher or lower than 
the stated salary due to their qualifications and 
experiences. A follow-up study could survey 
recently hired data professionals, asking them 
for their salary upon hire. 
 
Study Limitations 
 
This study does have some limitations. First, the 
sources of the job postings were chosen because 
they were known to attract postings for data 
professionals in academic libraries. However, 
these sources were not exhaustive for data 
professional job postings in academic libraries 
from 2013-2018. Additionally, job positions were 
only included in this study when the full job 
posting was available. As noted above, seven job 
positions were excluded because the full job 
postings were not available. This study also only 
included job positions within the US; data 
professionals are a growing sector in academic 
libraries worldwide. A follow-up study could 
analyze job postings for data professionals 
outside of the US. 
 
An inherent limitation of job posting analyses is 
that job postings tend to be very aspirational, 
meaning that a data professional’s actual 
responsibilities could vary greatly from those 
listed in the job posting. A follow-up study 
could carry out in-depth interviews with data 
professionals to compare how their actual 
responsibilities align with those in the job 
posting. 
 
Finally, this study is undercounting the number 
of data professionals working in academic 
libraries, especially those working at Master’s or 
Baccalaureate institutions. Many could have 
RDS roles or responsibilities added to their job 
duties after hiring as data needs emerge on 
campus. Additionally, at many small and mid-
sized institutions, a librarian may be responsible 
for providing RDS but this responsibility is not 
large enough to be reflected in their job title 
(which was the initial screening mechanism to 
determine if a position should be included in 
this study). 
 
Conclusion 
 
Studies such as this do not have an impact 
unless the results are put into action. The 
following recommendations will help the reader 
to use this data to take steps toward 
incorporating DEI&A principles and practices 
into job postings: 
 
122 
 
● 
Write each and every sentence within a 
job posting using the lens of DEI&A 
principles and practices 
● 
List a quantitative salary value; it is a 
simple way to make the hiring process 
more transparent and less prone to 
inequitable practices. Listing a range 
indicates the possibility of negotiation, 
which is helpful for underrepresented 
groups 
● 
Carefully consider which degrees to 
include as required or preferred 
qualifications. For example, think 
critically about how an MLIS or an 
additional graduate degree would help 
the applicant perform the job 
responsibilities. Many positions in this 
study required an MLIS or asked for 
multiple degrees, which automatically 
limits the applicant pool. Due to 
inequalities built into our societal and 
educational systems, not everyone has 
access to attain a graduate degree. 
Consider undergraduate degrees or 
academic background as a way for an 
applicant to demonstrate expertise 
● 
Include DEI&A as a required 
qualification in the job posting to 
demonstrate that the institution is 
committed to hiring applicants who 
understand the value and importance of 
DEI&A 
● 
Write the job description that the 
candidate will perform; job postings 
should be realistic not aspirational. One 
way to accomplish this is to limit 
preferred qualifications 
● 
Finally, this data can be used to initiate 
conversations; showing quantitative 
evidence of how disparities are 
inadvertently woven into hiring 
practices and providing evidence based 
suggestions for improvement can be a 
valuable tool for data-driving decision-
making. This set of recommendations is 
also transferable to other sub-disciplines 
of librarianship 
 
Job postings are a small yet very important part 
of the hiring process. It is hoped that this article 
will inspire reviews of hiring processes as a 
whole. The data is openly available in the Dryad 
Repository 
https://datadryad.org/stash/dataset/doi:10.6078/
D1K419; the authors strongly encourage other 
researchers to further analyze this data. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The authors thank Kristin Briney for reviewing 
the codebook, as well as Marie Kennedy, Abigail 
Goben, and Tina Griffin for reviewing a draft of 
this article and providing valuable feedback. 
 
References 
 
ACRL Research Planning and Review 
Committee. (2016). 2016 top trends in 
academic libraries: A review of the 
trends and issues affecting academic 
libraries in higher education. College & 
Research Libraries News, 77(6), 274-281. 
https://doi.org/10.5860/crln.77.6.9505 
 
ACRL Planning and Review Committee. (2018). 
2018 top ten trends in academic 
libraries: A review of the trends and 
issues affecting academic libraries in 
higher education. College & Research 
Libraries News, 79(6), 286-300. 
https://doi.org/10.5860/crln.79.6.286 
 
Association of College & Research Libraries Science 
& Technology Section [Electronic mailing 
list]. (n.d.). Retrieved from 
lists.ala.org/sympa/info/sts-l 
 
Brown, S. (2019). Want a more diverse campus? 
Start at the top. In The Chronicle of Higher 
Education. Retrieved from 
 
123 
 
https://www.chronicle.com/article/Want
-a-More-Diverse-Campus-/247285 
 
Code4Lib Jobs [Electronic mailing list]. (n.d.). 
Retrieved from jobs.code4lib.org 
 
Chen, H., & Zhang, Y. (2017). Educating data 
management professionals: A content 
analysis of job descriptions. The Journal 
of Academic Librarianship, 43(1), 18–24. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acalib.2016.11.0
02 0099-1333 
 
Cox, A. M., & Pinfield, S. (2014). Research data 
management and libraries: Current 
activities and future priorities. Journal of 
Librarianship and Information Science, 
46(4), 299–316. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/096100061349254
2 
 
Digital Library Federation Job Board [Electronic 
mailing list]. (n.d.). Retrieved from 
jobs.diglib.org/ 
 
Educause Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion. 
(n.d.). Retrieved from 
https://www.educause.edu/about/divers
ity-equity-and-inclusion 
 
Fernandes, J.D., Sarabipour, S., Smith, C.T., 
Niemi, N.M., Jadavji, N.M., Kozik, A.J., 
Holehouse, A.S., Pejaver, V., Symmons, 
O., Filho, A.W.B., & Haage, A. (2020). A 
survey-based analysis of the academic 
job market. eLife, 9:e54097.  
https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.54097 
 
Guest, G., MacQueen, K., & Namey, E. (2012). 
Applied Thematic Analysis. Los Angeles, 
CA: Sage Publications. 
 
Hall-Ellis, S. D. (2005). Descriptive impressions 
of entry-level cataloger positions as 
reflected in American Libraries, 
AutoCAT, and the Colorado State 
Library Jobline, 2000-2003. Cataloging & 
Classification Quarterly, 40(2), 33-72. 
https://doi.org/10.1300/J104v40n02_05 
 
Hall-Ellis, S. D. (2006). Descriptive impressions 
of managerial and supervisory cataloger 
positions as reflected in American 
Libraries, AutoCAT, and the Colorado 
State Library Jobline, 2000-2004: A 
content analysis of education, 
competencies, and experience. 
Cataloging & Classification Quarterly, 
42(1), 55-92. 
https://doi.org/10.1300/J104v42n01_06 
 
Indiana University. (2017). About the Carnegie 
Classification. In The Carnegie 
Classification of Institutions of Higher 
Education. Retrieved from 
http://carnegieclassifications.iu.edu/ 
 
International Association for Social Science 
Information Service & Technology Jobs 
Portal [Electronic mailing list]. (n.d.). 
Retrieved from 
https://iassistdata.org/jobs-repository/ 
 
Internet Archive WayBack Machine. (n.d.). 
Retrieved from archive.org/web 
 
Jardine, F. M., & Zerhusen, E. K. (2015). 
Charting the course of equity and 
inclusion in LIS through iDiversity. The 
Library Quarterly, 85(2), 185-192. 
https://doi.org/10.1086/680156 
 
Kim, J., & Angnakoon, P. (2016). Research using 
job advertisements: A methodological 
assessment. Library & Information Science 
Research, 38(4), 327-335. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lisr.2016.11.006 
 
Kim, J., Warga, E., & Moen, W. (2013). 
Competencies required for digital 
curation: An analysis of job 
advertisements. International Journal of 
Digital Curation, 8(1), 66-83. 
https://doi.org/10.2218/ijdc.v8i1.242 
 
124 
 
Mohr, T. S. (2014). Why women don’t apply for 
jobs unless they’re 100% qualified. In 
Harvard Business Review. Retrieved from 
https://hbr.org/2014/08/why-women-
dont-apply-for-jobs-unless-theyre-100-
qualified 
 
Oh, B., & Kim, C. (2020). Broken promise of 
college? New educational sorting 
mechanisms for intergenerational 
association in the 21st century. Social 
Science Research, 86(102375), 1-15. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssresearch.2019.
102375  
 
Research Data Access & Preservation Association 
[Electronic mailing list]. (n.d.). Retrieved 
from https://rdapassociation.org 
 
Si, L., Zhuang, X., Xing, W., & Guo, W. (2013). 
The cultivation of scientific data 
specialists: Development of LIS 
education oriented to e-science service 
requirements. Library Hi Tech, 31(4), 700-
724.  
https://doi.org/10.1108/LHT-06-2013-
0070 
 
Silva, E., & Galbraith, Q. (2018). Salary 
negotiation patterns between women 
and men in academic libraries. College & 
Research Libraries, 79(3), 324-335. 
https://doi.org/10.5860/crl.79.3.324 
 
Soto, M. & Yao, C. (2010). Retention of women 
of color in STEM doctoral programs. 
Proceedings of the 29th Annual Midwest 
Research to Practice Conference in Adult, 
Continuing, Community, and Extension 
Education. East Lansing, Michigan, 207-
213.  
 
Tenopir, C., Sandusky, R. J., Allard, S., & Birch, 
B. (2013). Academic librarians and 
research data services: Preparation and 
attitudes. IFLA Journal, 39(1), 70-78. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/034003521247308
9 
Tenopir, C., Kaufman, J., Sandusky, R., & 
Pollock, C. (2019). Research data 
services in academic libraries: Where are 
we today? [White paper]. In Choice. 
Retrieved from 
https://choice360.org/librarianship/whit
epaper 
 
Thielen, J., & Neeser, A. (2019). How you can 
write more inclusive data practitioner 
job postings. Journal of eScience 
Librarianship, 8(2), e1167. 
https://doi.org/10.7191/jeslib.2019.1167 
 
University of California Berkeley. (2018). 
Berkeley strategic plan. In Berkeley 
University of California. Retrieved from 
https://strategicplan.berkeley.edu/public
ations/ 
 
University of Michigan. (2020). Rackham 
Professional Development Diversity, 
Equity, and Inclusion Certificate. In 
Rackham Graduate School. Retrieved from 
https://rackham.umich.edu/professional
-development/dei-certificate/ 
 
Willis, D. S. (2017). Getting up to speed on 
diversity. In Inside Higher Ed. Retrieved 
from 
https://www.insidehighered.com/advice
/2017/08/21/how-graduate-students-can-
demonstrate-commitment-diversity-job-
interviews-essay 
 
Xia, J., & Wang, M. (2014). Competencies and 
responsibilities of social science data 
librarians: An analysis of job 
descriptions. College & Research Libraries, 
75(3), 362-388. 
https://doi.org/10.5860/crl13-435 
 
Yoon, K., Hulscher, L., & Dols, R. (2016). 
Accessibility and diversity in library 
and information science: Inclusive 
information architecture for library 
websites. The Library Quarterly, 86(2), 
213-229. https://doi.org/10.1086/685399
 
125 
 
Appendix A  
Metadata about Data Professional Job Postings  
(Note, this appendix only includes the 177 job postings analyzed in this study) 
 
University 
Name 
Carnegie Classification 
Position Title 
Posting 
Date  
Notes 
American 
University 
Doctoral Universities: High 
Research Activity 
Research Data Librarian 
2013-01  
Auburn 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Research Data Management 
Librarian 
2017-03  
Boston College 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data and Visualization 
Librarian 
2016-12  
Brown 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Scientific Data Management 
Specialist 
2013-11  
Brown 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Scientific Data Curator 
2013-03  
Bryn Mawr 
College 
Baccalaureate Colleges: Arts 
& Sciences Focus 
Social Sciences and Data 
Librarian 
2018-02  
California State 
University 
Northridge 
Master's Colleges & 
Universities: Larger Programs Business & Data Librarian 
2013-01  
Carnegie 
Mellon 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Services Librarian 
2014-05  
Case Western 
Reserve 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Research Data Specialist 
2018-01  
Colby College 
Baccalaureate Colleges: Arts 
& Sciences Focus 
Social Sciences Data Librarian 
2014-02  
Colorado State 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Management Specialist 
2017-11  
Colorado State 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Management Specialist 
2016-01  
Columbia 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Research Support & Data 
Services Librarian 
2014-04  
Columbia 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Research Support & Data 
Services Librarian 
2016-10  
Columbia 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Services Librarian 
2014-12  
Columbia 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Services & Emerging 
Technologies Librarian 
2014-05  
Columbia 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Research Support & Data 
Services Librarian 
2015-04  
 
126 
 
Cornell 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Social Science and Geospatial 
Data Librarian 
2017-09  
Cornell 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Research Data and 
Environmental Sciences 
Librarian 
2014-02  
CUNY 
Graduate 
School and 
University 
Center 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Librarian 
2014-12  
Dartmouth 
College 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data & Visualization Librarian 2015-12  
DePaul 
University 
Doctoral Universities: High 
Research Activity 
Data Services & Government 
Information Librarian 
2016-06  
Drake 
University 
Doctoral/Professional Schools Data and Business Librarian 
2015-04  
Drexel 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Director, Data & Digital 
Stewardship 
2015-10  
Drexel 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Director, Informatics for 
Research Engagement 
2014-02  
Duke 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Senior Research Data 
Management Consultant 
2016-08 
This posting 
was for two 
positions 
East Carolina 
University 
Doctoral Universities: High 
Research Activity 
Data Services Librarian 
2017-03  
Florida Institute 
of Technology 
Doctoral Universities: High 
Research Activity 
Research Data Specialist 
2014-11  
Florida Institute 
of Technology 
Doctoral Universities: High 
Research Activity 
Data Librarian 
2018-05  
Florida State 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Research Librarian 
2013-11  
Florida State 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Social Sciences Research & 
Data Librarian 
2016-10  
George 
Washington 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Services Librarian 
2017-10  
George 
Washington 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Services Librarian 
2014-07  
Georgia 
Southern 
University 
Doctoral Universities: High 
Research Activity 
Discovery Services and Data 
Curation Librarian 
2014-12  
Georgia State 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Team Leader, Research Data 
Services 
2016-01  
Georgia State 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Quantitative Data Specialist for 
the Social Sciences 
2017-08  
 
127 
 
Georgia State 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Business Data Services 
Librarian 
2014-06  
Harvard 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Librarian for the Social Sciences 
and Visualization 
2014-10  
Harvard 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Research Data Management 
Librarian for the Sciences 
2018-04  
Harvard 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Research Data & Collections 
Librarian 
2017-05  
Indiana 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Research Data Management 
Librarian 
2016-06  
Indiana 
University 
Bloomington 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Research Data Management 
Librarian 
2015-08  
Indiana 
University 
Bloomington 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Research Data Management 
Librarian and Head of 
Scholarly Communication 
Department 
2016-05  
Johns Hopkins 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Management Services 
Manager 
2015-12  
Johns Hopkins 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Informationist 
2016-03  
Johns Hopkins 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Services Manager 
2017-01  
Johns Hopkins 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Management Consultant 
2015-04  
Johns Hopkins 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Management Specialist 
2016-02  
Kenyon College Baccalaureate Colleges: Arts 
& Sciences Focus 
Social Sciences and Data 
Librarian 
2016-03  
Lehigh 
University 
Doctoral Universities: High 
Research Activity 
Business/Data Librarian 
2015-11  
Lewis & Clark 
College 
Baccalaureate Colleges: Arts 
& Sciences Focus 
Science & Data Services 
Librarian 
2014-10  
Louisiana State 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Curation Librarian 
2015-01  
Massachusetts 
Institute of 
Technology 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Program Head, Data 
Management Services 
2016-11  
Michigan State 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Librarian 
2016-04  
Middlebury 
College 
Baccalaureate Colleges: Arts 
& Sciences Focus 
Data Services Librarian 
2015-05  
Montana State 
University 
Doctoral Universities: High 
Research Activity 
Data Management Librarian 
2013-08  
New York 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Knowledge Management 
Librarian 
2014-10  
 
128 
 
New York 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Services Librarian 
2015-03  
New York 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Research Data Management 
Librarian 
2014-11  
North Carolina 
State University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Research Data & Infrastructure 
Librarian 
2018-03  
North Carolina 
State University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Research Librarian for 
Engineering and Biotechnology 2015-09  
Northwestern 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Scientist 
2017-03  
Oakland 
University 
Doctoral Universities: High 
Research Activity 
Research Data Librarian 
2015-11  
Occidental 
College 
Baccalaureate Colleges: Arts 
& Sciences Focus 
Data and Information Specialist 
for the Social Sciences 
2017-08  
Ohio State 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Management Services 
Librarian 
2013-05  
Oregon Health 
& Science 
University 
Special Focus Four-Year: 
Medical Schools & Centers 
Basic Science Liaison/Research 
Data Management Librarian 
2015-12  
Oregon State 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Management Specialist 
2015-12  
Pennsylvania 
State University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Science Data Librarian 
2014-11  
Princeton 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Services Specialist 
2013-06  
Princeton 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Interdisciplinary Quantitative 
Research Librarian 
2015-08  
Purdue 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Repository Outreach 
Specialist 
2015-08  
Purdue 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Research Data Specialist 
2015-02  
Purdue 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Digital Data Repository 
Specialist 
2014-12  
Reed College 
Baccalaureate Colleges: Arts 
& Sciences Focus 
Data Services Librarian 
2015-07  
Rice University Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data and Government 
Information Librarian 
2017-11  
Rice University Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Head, Kelley Center for 
Government Information, Data 
& Geospatial Services 
2014-06  
Rutgers 
University 
Doctoral Universities: High 
Research Activity 
Data Services Librarian 
2013-06  
San Diego State 
University 
Doctoral Universities: High 
Research Activity 
Social Science & Data Librarian 2018-01  
San Jose State 
University 
Master's Colleges & 
Universities: Larger Programs Data Services Librarian 
2017-05  
 
129 
 
Southern 
California 
University of 
Health Sciences 
Special Focus Four-Year: 
Other Health Professions 
Schools 
Knowledge Management & 
Data Specialist 
2015-09  
Stanford 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Services and Visualization 
Librarian 
2017-05  
Stanford 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Engineering Librarian for Data 
and Collections 
2018-06  
Temple 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Research and Data Services 
Librarian 
2018-05  
Texas A&M 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Librarian 
2016-09  
Tufts University Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Librarian for Research Data 
2016-09  
Tufts University Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Social Science Data Librarian 
2017-05  
University of 
Arizona 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Research Data Management 
Librarian 
2017-03  
University of 
Arkansas at 
Little Rock 
Doctoral Universities: High 
Research Activity 
Data Services Librarian 
2018-06  
University of 
California - 
Irvine 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
E-Research and Digital 
Scholarship Services Librarian 
2014-10  
University of 
California - Los 
Angeles 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Sciences Data Informationist 
2016-11  
University of 
California - Los 
Angeles 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Grand Challenges Data 
Administrator 
2016-09  
University of 
California - Los 
Angeles 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Director of UCLA Libraries 
Social Science Data Archive 
2016-06  
University of 
California - San 
Diego 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Services and Collections 
Librarian 
2014-03  
University of 
California - San 
Diego 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Director, Research Data 
Curation Services 
2013-01  
University of 
California - San 
Diego 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Metadata Specialist 
2018-06  
University of 
California - San 
Diego 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Science Librarian 
2017-09  
 
130 
 
University of 
California - San 
Diego 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Director, Research Data 
Curation Services 
2013-01  
University of 
California - San 
Diego 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Research Data Metadata 
Librarian 
2017-11  
University of 
California - San 
Diego 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Research Data Curation 
Program Technical Analyst 
2013-07  
University of 
California 
Berkeley 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Science Data & Engineering 
Librarian 
2015-07  
University of 
California 
Berkeley 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Business & Data Librarian 
2015-08  
University of 
California 
Berkeley 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Research Data Management 
Service Design Analyst 
2015-01  
University of 
California 
Berkeley 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Services Librarian 
2017-01  
University of 
California Davis 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Associate Director, Data 
Management Program 
2015-08  
University of 
California Davis 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Management Analyst 
2017-03  
University of 
California San 
Francisco 
Special Focus Four-Year: 
Medical Schools & Centers 
Data Services and Assessment 
Librarian 
2016-12  
University of 
California Santa 
Barbara 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Humanities Data Curator 
2015-09  
University of 
California Santa 
Barbara 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Geospatial Data Curator 
2013-08  
University of 
California Santa 
Barbara 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Services and Digital 
Scholarship Librarian 
2018-05  
University of 
Chicago 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Biomedical Data Librarian 
2017-12  
University of 
Chicago 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Social Science Data and 
Sociology Librarian 
2017-04  
University of 
Chicago 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Research Services and 
Biomedical Librarian 
2017-04  
University of 
Colorado 
Boulder 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Services Librarian 
2017-07  
 
131 
 
University of 
Florida 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Management Librarian 
2015-04  
University of 
Houston 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Social Science Data Librarian 
2014-03  
University of 
Houston 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Services Librarian 
2016-11  
University of 
Houston 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Research Data Management 
Librarian 
2018-05  
University of 
Illinois Urbana-
Champaign 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Director, Research Data Service 
and Open-Rank Professor 
2013-10  
University of 
Illinois Urbana-
Champaign 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Curation Specialist 
2014-11 
This posting 
was for two 
positions 
University of 
Iowa 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Services Manager 
2017-02  
University of 
Kansas 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Services Librarian 
2013-06  
University of 
Maryland 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Services Librarian 
2017-01  
University of 
Maryland 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Services Librarian 
2018-07  
University of 
Massachusetts 
Amherst 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Services Librarian 
2017-05  
University of 
Miami 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Services Librarian 
2016-09  
University of 
Michigan 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Workflows Specialist 
2017-01  
University of 
Michigan 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Research Data Curation 
Librarian 
2014-11  
University of 
Michigan 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Research Data Services 
Manager 
2013-12  
University of 
Michigan 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Curation Librarian 
2017-07  
University of 
Michigan 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Health Sciences Data Services 
Informationist 
2015-11  
University of 
Minnesota 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Biosciences Liaison Librarian 
and Scientific Data Curator 
2017-06  
University of 
Minnesota 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Informatics/Data Services 
Specialist 
2013-06  
University of 
Minnesota 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Public Health Liaison and Data 
Curation Specialist 
2015-10  
University of 
Nebraska - 
Lincoln 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Curation Librarian 
2016-08  
 
132 
 
University of 
Nebraska - 
Lincoln 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Curation Librarian 
2013-12  
University of 
Nevada Las 
Vegas 
Doctoral Universities: High 
Research Activity 
Social Sciences Data Librarian 
2014-08  
University of 
New 
Hampshire 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Business and Data Reference 
Librarian 
2015-03  
University of 
New 
Hampshire 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Research Data Services 
Librarian 
2018-01  
University of 
New Mexico 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Director of Research Data 
Services 
2013-12  
University of 
New Mexico 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Curation Librarian 
2017-07  
University of 
North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Repository Librarian 
2015-04  
University of 
North Carolina 
at Greensboro 
Doctoral Universities: High 
Research Activity 
Research and Data Support 
Coordinator 
2013-10  
University of 
North Carolina 
Wilmington 
Doctoral Universities: High 
Research Activity 
Digital Program and Data 
Management Librarian 
2013-03  
University of 
Notre Dame 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Digital Library Data Curation 
Developer 
2015-07  
University of 
Pennsylvania 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Business & Data Analysis 
Librarian 
2018-04  
University of 
Pennsylvania 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Scholarly Communications & 
Data Curation Librarian 
2016-03  
University of 
Pittsburgh 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Services Librarian 
2017-07  
University of 
Pittsburgh 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Curation Librarian 
2018-06  
University of 
Rhode Island 
Doctoral Universities: High 
Research Activity 
Data Services Librarian 
2016-05  
University of 
Rochester 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Science & Engineering 
Outreach Librarian (Data) 
2018-01  
University of 
Tennessee 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Curation Librarian 
2013-03  
University of 
Texas at 
Arlington 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data & eScience Librarian 
2014-12  
 
133 
 
University of 
Texas at 
Arlington 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Social Sciences Data Librarian 
2014-11  
University of 
Texas at Austin 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Management Coordinator 2015-09  
University of 
Vermont 
Doctoral Universities: High 
Research Activity 
Science and Data Librarian 
2017-02  
University of 
Virginia 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Senior Research Data Scientist 
2014-05  
University of 
Virginia 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data and Geographical 
Information Librarian 
2013-01  
University of 
Virginia 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Research Data Specialist 
2017-02  
University of 
Virginia 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Clinical Data Research 
Specialist 
2017-02  
University of 
Washington 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Management Librarian 
2015-05  
University of 
Wisconsin 
Madison 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Science & Engineering Data & 
Information Specialist 
2018-04 
This posting 
was for two 
positions 
University of 
Wisconsin 
Madison 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Digital Curation Coordinator 
2017-06  
University of 
Wisconsin 
Milwaukee 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Services Librarian 
2013-07  
Upstate Medical 
University 
Special Focus Four-Year: 
Medical Schools & Centers 
Data Services Librarian 
2018-05  
Vanderbilt 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Business and Data Analysis 
Librarian 
2016-12  
Vassar College 
Baccalaureate Colleges: Arts 
& Sciences Focus 
Social Sciences and Data 
Librarian 
2016-03  
Villanova 
University 
Doctoral Universities: High 
Research Activity 
Social Sciences and Data 
Services Librarian 
2015-12  
Virginia 
Commonwealth 
University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Research Data Librarian 
2017-05  
Virginia 
Polytechnic 
Institute and 
State University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data and Informatics 
Consultant 
2013-12  
Virginia 
Polytechnic 
Institute and 
State University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Social Science Data Consultant 
& Data Educator Coordinator 
2017-04  
 
134 
 
Virginia 
Polytechnic 
Institute and 
State University 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Research Data Consultant 
2014-05  
Washington 
University in St. 
Louis 
Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Specialist 
2015-04  
Western 
Michigan 
University 
Doctoral Universities: High 
Research Activity 
Data Librarian 
2018-02  
Yale University Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Librarian 
2017-11  
Yale University Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Data Librarian for the Health 
Sciences 
2018-03  
Yale University Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Research Data Support 
Specialist 
2016-07  
Yale University Doctoral Universities: Very 
High Research Activity 
Librarian for Finance, 
Accounting & Business Data 
2018-04 
 
 
 
 
 
135 
 
Appendix B  
Codebook 
 
 Variable 
Attributes 
Education, experience, and salary 
 
 
 
 MLIS degree 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
 Equivalent degree 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
 Equivalent degree level* 
Not 
applicable 
Bachelor's 
Master's 
Doctorate 
Advanced 
Not 
specified 
 
 
 
Equivalent degree 
discipline(s)* 
Not 
applicable 
Arts & Humanities 
Social 
Sciences 
STEM 
Data 
Intensive/Data 
Science 
Business 
Relevant 
Not 
specified 
 
Academic library 
experience 
No 
1-2 years 
3-5 years 
5+ years 
Length not 
specified 
 
 
 
 [Location in job posting] 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
 
Research data 
experience 
No 
1-2 years 
3-5 years 
5+ years 
Length not 
specified 
 
 
 
 [Location in job posting] 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
 Supervisory experience 
No 
1-2 years 
3-5 years 
5+ years 
Length not 
specified 
 
 
 
 [Location in job posting] 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
 
Additional experience or 
degree 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
 Additional degree level* 
Not 
applicable 
Bachelor's 
Master's 
Doctorate or 
PhD 
Advanced 
 
 
 
 
[Discipline of additional 
degree*] 
Not 
applicable 
Arts & Humanities 
Social 
Sciences 
STEM 
Data Intensive, 
Data Science, 
and others. 
Business 
Relevant 
Not 
specified 
 
136 
 
 Additional experience* 
Not 
applicable 
Significant 
coursework or 
academic 
background 
Subject 
knowledge 
Lab or research 
experience 
Other, specify: 
[free text] 
 
 
 
 
Carnegie Classification 
of Institution 
Baccalaureat
e 
Master's 
Doctoral 
Special Focus 
 
 
 
 
 
[For doctoral institutions, 
specify the research 
intensity level] 
Not 
applicable 
Very high 
High 
Doctoral/Professi
onal 
 
 
 
 
 Salary information* 
Not 
applicable 
Commensurate 
Competitive 
Other, specify: 
[free text] 
 
 
 
 
 
Salary range or 
minimum 
Not 
applicable 
[Exact salary 
values] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Research Data Activities 
 
Management 
 
 
General Data 
Management 
Not 
applicable 
Implied 
Familiarity 
Knowledge 
Experienced 
 
 
 
 [Location in job posting] 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
 Data Management Plans 
Not 
applicable 
Implied 
Familiarity 
Knowledge 
Experienced 
 
 
 
 [Location in job posting] 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
Discovery and Re-Use 
 
 Data Discovery 
Not 
applicable 
Implied 
Familiarity 
Knowledge 
Experienced 
 
 
 
 [Location in job posting] 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
Collection 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Data Organization 
Not 
applicable 
Implied 
Familiarity 
Knowledge 
Experienced 
 
 
 
 
137 
 
 [Location in job posting] 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
 Data Documentation 
Not 
applicable 
Implied 
Familiarity 
Knowledge 
Experienced 
 
 
 
 [Location in job posting] 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
Storage 
 
 Data Storage 
Not 
applicable 
Implied 
Familiarity 
Knowledge 
Experienced 
 
 
 
 [Location in job posting] 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
 Data Security 
Not 
applicable 
Implied 
Familiarity 
Knowledge 
Experienced 
 
 
 
 [Location in job posting] 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
 Data Visualization 
Not 
applicable 
Implied 
Familiarity 
Knowledge 
Experienced 
 
 
 
 [Location in job posting] 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
 General Data Analysis 
Not 
applicable 
Implied 
Familiarity 
Knowledge 
Experienced 
 
 
 
 [Location in job posting] 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
 Statistical Data Analysis 
Not 
applicable 
Implied 
Familiarity 
Knowledge 
Experienced 
 
 
 
 [Location in job posting] 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
 Spatial Data Analysis 
Not 
applicable 
Implied 
Familiarity 
Knowledge 
Experienced 
 
 
 
 [Location in job posting] 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
 
138 
 
 
Qualitative Data 
Analysis 
Not 
applicable 
Implied 
Familiarity 
Knowledge 
Experienced 
 
 
 
 [Location in job posting] 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
 
Programming 
Languages 
Not 
applicable 
Implied 
Familiarity 
Knowledge 
Experienced 
 
 
 
 [Location in job posting] 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
 
[List programming 
languages] 
Not 
applicable 
[List programming 
languages] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sharing 
 
 Data Sharing 
Not 
applicable 
Implied 
Familiarity 
Knowledge 
Experienced 
 
 
 
 [Location in job posting] 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
Preservation 
 
 Data Repository 
Not 
applicable 
Implied 
Familiarity 
Knowledge 
Experienced 
 
 
 
 [Location in job posting] 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
 Data Curation 
Not 
applicable 
Implied 
Familiarity 
Knowledge 
Experienced 
 
 
 
 [Location in job posting] 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
Other 
 
 Data Policy 
Not 
applicable 
Implied 
Familiarity 
Knowledge 
Experienced 
 
 
 
 [Location in job posting] 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other Responsibilities or Skills 
 
 Instruction 
Not 
applicable 
Implied 
Familiarity 
Knowledge 
Experienced 
 
 
 
 
139 
 
 [Location in job posting] 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
 Consultation 
Not 
applicable 
Implied 
Familiarity 
Knowledge 
Experienced 
 
 
 
 [Location in job posting] 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
 
Public/customer service 
perspective 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
 Faculty status 
No 
Yes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tenure requirement 
No 
Yes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Research/Publishing 
requirement 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
 Liaison to department 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
 
[Whether depts. are 
listed] 
Depts. as 
assigned 
Specific depts. listed 
Not 
applicable 
 
 
 
 
 
 [List all depts. specified] 
Not 
applicable 
[List specific depts.]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Research data role 
focused on specific 
discipline(s) 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
 
[Whether disciplines are 
listed] 
Disciplines 
as assigned 
Specific discipline 
listed 
Not 
applicable 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[List all disciplines 
specified] 
Not 
applicable 
[List specific 
disciplines] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Assessment 
Not 
applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
 
Scholarly 
Communication 
Not applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
 Outreach 
Not applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
 
Collaboration with other 
campus units 
Not applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
 
140 
 
 
Diversity, equity, 
inclusion and 
accessibility 
Not applicable 
Description 
Respon. 
Preferred Qual. 
Required Qual. 
 
 
 
 
 
NOTES  
 
 
 
* = select all attributes that apply 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Synonyms for attributes  
 
 
 
 
Doctorate = terminal 
 
 
 
 
Advanced = graduate, professional 
 
 
 
 
Knowledge = understanding, competent, competence 
 
 
 
Experience = ability, demonstrated ability, aptitude 
 
 
 
Relevant = related, appropriate, comparable 
 
 
 
Commensurate = dependent 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hierarchy for location  
 
 
 
 
Required qual > Preferred qual > Responsibilities > Description 
 
Operational Definitions 
 Variable 
Definition 
When to Use 
When NOT to Use 
How to Use 
Definition source 
Experience, education and salary 
 MLIS degree 
Master's of Library or 
Information Science 
degree (often 
abbreviated MLIS, 
MLS, MSI, and others) 
Any reference of a 
Master's degree in 
Library and Information 
Science 
Graduate degree other 
than a MLIS (or 
equivalent); 
Undergraduate degree(s) 
Code where it occurs in the 
job posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description) 
-- 
 
Equivalent 
degree 
A degree (besides a 
MLIS) that provides a 
relevant educational 
background 
If phase like “equivalent 
degree” is used to 
describe the educational 
background needed for 
the position 
Additional graduate 
degree or undergraduate 
degree; MLIS degree 
Code where it occurs in the 
job posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description) 
-- 
 
141 
 
 
Equivalent 
degree level(s) 
The level of an 
equivalent degree that 
provides a relevant 
educational 
background 
If the level of the degree 
is specified in the phase 
“equivalent degree” 
Additional graduate 
degree or undergraduate 
degree; MLIS degree 
Code level of degree: Not 
applicable, Bachelor's, 
Master's, Doctorate, 
Advanced, Not specified 
-- 
 
Equivalent 
degree 
discipline(s) 
The discipline of the 
degree (besides a 
MLIS) that provides a 
relevant educational 
background 
If the discipline of the 
degree is specified in 
the phase “equivalent 
degree” 
Additional graduate 
degree or undergraduate 
degree; MLIS degree 
Code for all disciplines 
specified: Not applicable, 
Arts & Humanities, Social 
Sciences, STEM, Data 
Intensive/Data Science, 
Business, Relevant, Not 
specified 
-- 
 
Academic 
library 
experience 
Experience working in 
an academic library 
Any experience 
working in an academic 
library (including work 
as a student) 
Experience working in 
any setting outside of an 
academic library 
1) Code the length of 
experience (# of years) or 
length not specified (if not 
stated, code “No”); 2) Code 
where it occurs in the job 
posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description) 
-- 
 
Research data 
experience 
Professional experience 
working with research 
data, either inside or 
outside of a library 
context 
Work experience 
relating to any aspect of 
the research data 
lifecycle, either in an 
academic library or 
outside (i.e., experience 
as a researcher) 
Professional experience 
working in any other area 
(either inside or outside of 
a library); supervisory 
experience 
1) Code the length of 
experience (# of years) or 
length not specified (if not 
stated, code “No”); 2) Code 
where it occurs in the job 
posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description) 
-- 
 
142 
 
 
Supervisory 
experience 
Professional experience 
working as a 
supervisor or manager 
Supervisory or 
managerial experience 
Other types of experience 
1) Code the length of 
experience (# of years) or 
length not specified (if not 
stated, code “No”); 2) Code 
where it occurs in the job 
posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description) 
-- 
 
Additional 
degree 
Experience or degree 
(undergraduate or 
graduate) mentioned in 
addition to the MLIS or 
equivalent degree 
Experience or degree 
(undergraduate or 
graduate) mentioned in 
addition to the MLIS or 
equivalent degree 
MLIS degree; equivalent 
degree 
Code where it occurs in the 
job posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description) 
-- 
 
Additional 
degree level 
Level of degree 
(undergraduate or 
graduate) in any 
discipline other than 
library and information 
science 
Level of degree 
(undergraduate or 
graduate) in any 
discipline other than 
library and information 
science 
MLIS degree; equivalent 
degree 
1) Code level of degree: 
Not applicable, Bachelor's, 
Master's, Doctorate or PhD, 
Advanced; 2) Code for all 
disciplines specified: Not 
applicable, Arts & 
Humanities, Social 
Sciences, STEM, Data 
Intensive/Data Science, 
Business, Relevant, Not 
specified 
-- 
 
Additional 
experience 
Additional types of 
academic or 
professional experience 
Additional types of 
academic or 
professional experience Any mentions of degrees 
Code for all experiences 
specified: Not applicable, 
Significant coursework or 
academic background, 
Subject knowledge, Lab or 
research experience, other, 
specify: [free text] 
-- 
 
143 
 
 
Carnegie 
Classification 
of Institution 
The Carnegie 
Classification of the 
institution which can 
be found at: 
http://carnegieclassifica
tions.iu.edu/classificati
on_descriptions/basic.p
hp 
Identify name of the 
posting institution and 
then look up the 
Carnegie Classification 
on this website: 
http://carnegieclassificat
ions.iu.edu/classificatio
n_descriptions/basic.ph
p 
-- 
1) Code this classification 
by looking up the 
institution's name on this 
website: 
http://carnegieclassification
s.iu.edu/classification_desc
riptions/basic.php; 2) Code 
the level of research 
activity for Doctoral-
granting universities or 
Not applicable 
-- 
 
Salary 
information 
Salary information 
listed in the job posting 
Description of salary 
information such as 
“competitive” or 
“commensurate” 
Numerical salary values; 
Description of any 
benefits 
Code the salary descriptors 
used: commensurate, 
competitive, other, specify: 
[free text] 
-- 
 
Salary range or 
minimum 
Numerical salary 
values given 
Exact numerical salary 
values given (minimum, 
maximum, range, and 
others) 
Salary descriptors such as 
“competitive” or 
“commensurate”; 
descriptions of any 
benefits 
Code exact salary values 
given (the salary range or 
minimum) or Not 
applicable 
-- 
Research Data Activities 
Management 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data 
Management 
Process of controlling 
& managing data, and 
its associated actions, 
created during 
planning and 
acquisition phases of 
observation and 
research 
Any reference to the 
term “data 
management” or the 
actions associated with 
data management 
Data management plans 
or other data plans (data 
sharing plans, data 
security plans, and others) 
1) Code degree of 
complexity sought for this 
variable (Not applicable, 
implied, familiarity, 
knowledge, experienced); 
2) Code where it occurs in 
the job posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description) 
Adapted from RDA 
Term Definition Tool 
 
144 
 
 
Data 
Management 
Plans 
A formal statement 
describing how 
research data will be 
managed and 
documented 
throughout a research 
project and the terms 
regarding the 
subsequent deposit of 
the data with a data 
repository for long-
term management and 
preservation 
Any reference to data 
management plans, 
DMPs, data sharing 
plans or any other type 
of written data plan 
required for a grant 
application 
Data management 
1) Code degree of 
complexity sought for this 
variable (Not applicable, 
implied, familiarity, 
knowledge, experienced); 
2) Code where it occurs in 
the job posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description) 
CASRAI Dictionary: 
Research Data Domain 
Discovery and Re-Use 
 Data Discovery 
Process of query or 
search to find 
(research) data of 
interest 
Any reference to 
locating, discovering or 
re-using existing 
datasets (including 
research data, reference 
data, government data, 
and others). Other 
terms could include 
data access and data 
identification 
-- 
1) Code degree of 
complexity sought for this 
variable (Not applicable, 
implied, familiarity, 
knowledge, experienced); 
2) Code where it occurs in 
the job posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description) 
RDA Term Definition 
Tool 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Collection 
 
Data 
Organization 
Process of creating a 
logical system for 
storing data files and 
folders 
Any reference to 
creating a data file 
organization system; 
Examples of 
organization technique: 
file naming conventions 
and file structures 
-- 
1) Code degree of 
complexity sought for this 
variable (Not applicable, 
implied, familiarity, 
knowledge, experienced); 
2) Code where it occurs in 
the job posting (required 
-- 
 
145 
 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description) 
 
Data 
Documentation 
The metadata or 
information about a 
data product (e.g., data 
table, database) that 
enables one to 
understand and use the 
data. Such information 
may include the 
scientific context 
underlying the data as 
well as who collected 
the data, why the data 
were collected, and 
where, when, and how 
the data were collected; 
Metadata: data about 
data, data that defines 
and describes the 
characteristics of other 
data 
Any reference to 
creating documentation 
(print or electronic 
format) about data or 
documenting data 
(including metadata 
and metadata 
standards); Reference to 
cleaning or cleansing 
research data prior to 
sharing, publishing, and 
others; Other terms: 
data quality 
-- 
1) Code degree of 
complexity sought for this 
variable (Not applicable, 
implied, familiarity, 
knowledge, experienced); 
2) Code where it occurs in 
the job posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description) 
Definition of metadata: 
CASRAI Dictionary 
Research Data Domain; 
Definition of 
documentation: 
DataONE Best Practices 
Primer 
Storage 
 Data Storage 
Recording of data on a 
storage media 
Any reference to how 
and where to store data, 
including storage 
media, storage 
locations, storage 
hardware or storage 
devices 
Data preservation 
1) Code degree of 
complexity sought for this 
variable (Not applicable, 
implied, familiarity, 
knowledge, experienced); 
2) Code where it occurs in 
the job posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
-- 
 
146 
 
responsibilities, 
description) 
 Data Security 
Measures taken to 
protect data from 
unauthorized access, 
change, destruction, or 
other threats 
Any reference to data 
security, preventing 
unauthorized access, 
and others. 
De-identification of data 
1) Code degree of 
complexity sought for this 
variable (Not applicable, 
implied, familiarity, 
knowledge, experienced); 
2) Code where it occurs in 
the job posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description) 
Adapted from Society of 
American Archivists' 
definition 
Analysis 
 
Data 
Visualization 
Visual representations 
of data 
Any reference to data 
visualization or 
visualization software 
(such as Tableau, and 
others.) 
-- 
1) Code degree of 
complexity sought for this 
variable (Not applicable, 
implied, familiarity, 
knowledge, experienced); 
2) Code where it occurs in 
the job posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description) 
-- 
 
General Data 
Analysis 
Analyzing data to 
search for trends or 
patterns 
Any reference to data 
analysis that DOES 
NOT specify one or 
more of the three 
specific types listed 
below; quantitative data 
analysis 
Spatial, geospatial, GIS, 
statistical, or qualitative 
analysis 
1) Code degree of 
complexity sought for this 
variable (Not applicable, 
implied, familiarity, 
knowledge, experienced); 
2) Code where it occurs in 
the job posting (required 
-- 
 
147 
 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description) 
 
Statistical Data 
Analysis 
Using statistics to 
analyze data for 
patterns and trends 
Any reference to 
statistical analysis 
methods or tests; 
Common tests include 
ANOVA, Chi-square 
tests, T-tests, Factor 
Analysis and Cluster 
Analysis. References to 
common software 
packages (such as SAS, 
SPSS, and others) 
Spatial, geospatial or GIS 
analysis 
1) Code degree of 
complexity sought for this 
variable (Not applicable, 
implied, familiarity, 
knowledge, experienced); 
2) Code where it occurs in 
the job posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description) 
-- 
 
Spatial Data 
Analysis 
Type of geographical 
analysis which seeks to 
explain patterns of 
human behavior and 
its spatial expression in 
terms of mathematics 
and geometry, that is, 
locational analysis 
Any reference to spatial 
analysis, geospatial, or 
GIS analysis; Mentions 
of using specific 
software such as ArcGIS Statistical analysis 
1) Code degree of 
complexity sought for this 
variable (Not applicable, 
implied, familiarity, 
knowledge, experienced); 
2) Code where it occurs in 
the job posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description) 
Dartmouth Libraries 
Geospatial Information 
Systems research guide 
 
Qualitative 
Data Analysis 
The identification, 
examination, and 
interpretation of 
patterns and themes in 
textual data and 
determining how these 
patterns and themes 
help answer the 
Any reference to 
qualitative data 
analysis, including text 
mining; Mentions of 
qualitative analysis 
software such as NVivo, 
Dedoose, ATLAS.ti, and 
others. 
Any analysis of 
quantitative data 
(statistical or spatial) 
1) Code degree of 
complexity sought for this 
variable (Not applicable, 
implied, familiarity, 
knowledge, experienced); 
2) Code where it occurs in 
the job posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
Pell Institute Evaluation 
Tool Kit: Analyzing 
Qualitative Data 
 
148 
 
research questions at 
hand 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description) 
 
Programming 
Languages 
If the position needs to 
know one or more 
computer 
programming 
languages (Python, C, 
Java, HTML, and 
others) 
Specific programming 
language(s) are 
mentioned 
Providing programming 
for the campus 
community (i.e., planning 
events) 
1) Code degree of 
complexity sought for this 
variable (Not applicable, 
implied, familiarity, 
knowledge, experienced); 
2) Code where it occurs in 
the job posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description); 3) List the 
specific programming 
languages mentioned (if 
none, use “Not 
applicable”) 
-- 
Sharing 
 Data Sharing 
The practice of making 
data available for 
discovery and reuse. 
This may be done, for 
example, by depositing 
the data in a repository 
or through data 
publication 
Any reference to 
sharing or publishing 
research data (outside 
of a research team) 
through a variety of 
possible avenues (data 
repository, data journal, 
and others); Mention on 
assigning persistent 
identifiers (PURLs, 
DOIs, and others). 
Other terms include 
data publishing and 
data dissemination 
Sharing within a research 
group or collaboration 
1) Code degree of 
complexity sought for this 
variable (Not applicable, 
implied, familiarity, 
knowledge, experienced); 
2) Code where it occurs in 
the job posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description) 
CASRAI Dictionary: 
Research Data Domain 
 
149 
 
Preservation 
 
Data 
Repository 
A digital archive that 
provides services for 
the storage and 
retrieval of digital 
content 
Any reference to using, 
creating, facilitating, 
and others. A data 
repository or data 
archive; other terms 
could include collecting 
datasets 
-- 
1) Code degree of 
complexity sought for this 
variable (Not applicable, 
implied, familiarity, 
knowledge, experienced); 
2) Code where it occurs in 
the job posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description) 
Data Curation Network: 
Data Curation Terms and 
Activities Report 
 Data Curation 
The encompassing 
work and actions taken 
by curators of a data 
repository in order to 
provide meaningful 
and enduring access to 
data. These activities 
include ingest, 
appraisal, curation, 
access and preservation 
Any reference to data 
curation, curating 
research data or related 
data curation activities; 
Other term: data curator -- 
1) Code degree of 
complexity sought for this 
variable (Not applicable, 
implied, familiarity, 
knowledge, experienced); 
2) Code where it occurs in 
the job posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description) 
Data Curation Network: 
Data Curation Terms and 
Activities Report 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Other 
 Data Policy 
An organization’s 
stated data/information 
management processes 
designed to assist and 
protect research data 
assets 
Any reference to data 
policies (a library's 
policies, university's 
policies, funder policies, 
and others) including 
data management plan 
policies, deposit 
policies, intellectual 
property policies, data 
-- 
1) Code degree of 
complexity sought for this 
variable (Not applicable, 
implied, familiarity, 
knowledge, experienced); 
2) Code where it occurs in 
the job posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
Adapted from RDA 
Term Definition Tool 
 
150 
 
curation policies, and 
others 
responsibilities, 
description) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Other Responsibilities or Skills 
 Instruction 
Teaching (online or in-
person) researchers 
about any research 
data management 
activities (including the 
variables listed in the 
Research Data 
Activities section of 
this codebook) 
Reference to teaching 
(in-person or online) 
sessions, workshops, 
courses, and others on 
research data 
management; Creating 
or maintaining tutorials, 
online modules, and 
others for asynchronous 
instruction 
Instruction for liaison, 
scholarly communication 
or other non-research data 
roles/responsibilities 
1) Code degree of 
complexity sought for this 
variable (Not applicable, 
implied, familiarity, 
knowledge, experienced); 
2) Code where it occurs in 
the job posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description) 
-- 
 
Data 
Consultation 
A meeting in which a 
data librarian or 
research data staff and 
patron discuss research 
data management 
issues and potential 
solutions 
Any reference to 
providing consultations 
or reference interactions 
for patrons to discuss 
research data 
management issues 
-- 
1) Code degree of 
complexity sought for this 
variable (Not applicable, 
implied, familiarity, 
knowledge, experienced); 
2) Code where it occurs in 
the job posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description) 
-- 
 
Public/custome
r service 
perspective 
Mindset focused on 
providing high quality 
public/ customer 
service 
Description of a 
mindset focused on 
providing high quality 
public/ customer service -- 
Code where it occurs in the 
job posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
-- 
 
151 
 
responsibilities, 
description) 
 Faculty status 
The position has 
faculty status at the 
institution (as opposed 
to being staff, academic 
staff, and others) 
Faculty status is 
mentioned 
Tenure-track position 
Code if this variable 
appears in the job posting 
(Yes, No) 
-- 
 
Tenure 
requirement 
If this position is a 
tenure-track position at 
the institution 
Tenure-track is 
mentioned 
Status at the institution 
(faculty, staff, academic 
staff, and others) 
Code if this variable 
appears in the job posting 
(Yes, No) 
-- 
 
Research/Publi
shing 
requirement 
If the successful 
candidate needs to 
have a demonstrated 
record of 
research/publishing 
(books, book chapters, 
journal articles, and 
others) or they 
demonstrate the ability 
to do research/ publish 
in the future 
Any mention that 
scholarly research/ 
publishing is a 
requirement of the 
position 
Publishing data for 
patrons; need to know 
about current topics in 
scholarly communication 
Code where it occurs in the 
job posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description) 
-- 
 
Liaison to 
department 
This position will serve 
as the library liaison to 
one or more 
departments or units at 
the institution, in 
addition to their 
research data 
responsibilities; 
provide reference/ 
research assistance, 
instruction, outreach, 
collection 
Liaison activities or 
work are mentioned 
(either with or without 
naming specific 
departments or units 
that the position will be 
the liaison to) 
Collaboration with other 
campus departments/ 
units; Research data role 
focused on specific 
disciplines 
1) Code where it occurs in 
the job posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description); 2) Whether 
specific departments are 
listed in the job posting 
(depts. as assigned, specific 
depts. listed, not 
applicable); 3) List the 
-- 
 
152 
 
development, and 
others 
specific depts (free text, not 
applicable) 
 
Research data 
role focused on 
specific 
discipline(s) 
This position focuses 
on the research data 
management needs of 
specific disciplines, 
schools, colleges, and 
others 
This position focuses on 
the research data 
management needs of 
specific disciplines, 
schools, colleges, and 
others 
Liaison to department; 
Collaboration with other 
campus 
departments/units 
1) Code where it occurs in 
the job posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description); 2) Whether 
specific disciplines are 
listed in the job posting 
(depts. as assigned, specific 
depts. listed, not 
applicable); 3) List the 
specific disciplines (free 
text, not applicable) 
-- 
 Assessment 
If the position will be 
involved in assessment 
projects, relating to the 
research data 
responsibilities 
Assessment is 
mentioned relating to 
research data 
responsibilities (such as 
assessment of patron 
satisfaction with the 
library's research data 
services) 
Assessment activities 
related to responsibilities 
outside of research data 
responsibilities (such as 
service work, liaison 
work, and others) 
Code where it occurs in the 
job posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description) 
-- 
 
Scholarly 
Communicatio
n 
If the position needs to 
know about the current 
landscape of scholarly 
communication 
Mentions of knowing 
about scholarly 
communication 
If the position required to 
publish 
Code where it occurs in the 
job posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description) 
-- 
 
153 
 
 Outreach 
If the position will be 
conducting outreach to 
the campus community 
(outside of the library) 
to advertise the 
library's research data 
services 
Mention of outreach, 
marketing or 
advertising the library's 
research data services 
Outreach for 
responsibilities outside of 
research data 
responsibilities (such as 
liaison activities) 
Code where it occurs in the 
job posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description) 
-- 
 
Collaboration 
with other 
campus units 
If this position will 
collaborate with 
campus units outside 
of the library (such as 
IT, research office, 
Provost's office, and 
others) on research 
data projects 
Collaboration with 
campus units outside of 
the library 
Liaison duties to campus 
departments/units 
Code where it occurs in the 
job posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description) 
-- 
 
Diversity, 
equity, 
inclusion and 
accessibility 
If the applicant needs 
to know about and 
recognize the 
importance of these 
issues within a library 
or university 
Any mention of 
applicant being 
committed or 
recognizing the 
importance of diversity, 
equity, inclusion, and 
accessibility (such as 
having to submit a 
Diversity Statement as 
part of the application 
or having a 
commitment to 
fostering these on 
campus) 
Language about the 
university's commitment 
to diversity, equity, 
inclusion, and 
accessibility 
Code where it occurs in the 
job posting (required 
qualifications, preferred 
qualifications, 
responsibilities, 
description) 
-- 
 
 
 
 
154 
 
Sources 
 
Sources of some Variables 
 
Hall-Ellis (2005). 
 
Hall-Ellis (2006). 
 
Chen, H. L., & Zhang, Y. (2017). Educating data management 
professionals: A content analysis of job descriptions. The Journal 
of Academic Librarianship, 43(1), 18-24. 
 
Xia & Wang (2014). 
 
 Indiana University. (2017). Institution Lookup. In The Carnegie 
Classification of Institutions of Higher Education. Retrieved from 
https://carnegieclassifications.iu.edu/lookup/lookup.php 
 
 
 
Sources of some Operational Definitions 
 
DataONE Best Practices Primer 
https://www.dataone.org/sites/all/documents/DataONE_BP_Pri
mer_020212.pdf 
Research Data Alliance (RDA) Term Definition Tool 
https://smw-rda.esc.rzg.mpg.de/index.php/Main_Page 
CASRAI Dictionary Research Data Domain 
http://dictionary.casrai.org/Category:Research_Data_Domain 
Society of American Archivists Glossary 
https://www2.archivists.org/glossary/terms 
Dartmouth Libraries Geographical Information Systems research 
guide 
https://researchguides.dartmouth.edu/gis/spatialanalysis 
Pell Institute Evaluation Toolkit: Analyzing Qualitative Data 
http://toolkit.pellinstitute.org/evaluation-guide/analyze/analyze-
qualitative-data/ 
Data Curation Network: Data Curation Terms and Activities 
report 
https://conservancy.umn.edu/bitstream/handle/11299/188638/Def
initionsofDataCurationActivities%20%281%29.pdf?sequence=1&i
sAllowed=y 
 
155 
 
Appendix C 
Supplementary Table 
 
Summary of mentions of 19 research data management activities: A) degree of complexity sought and B) 
location in the job posting. 
 
A) 
 
Experience 
Knowledge 
Familiarity 
Implied 
Not 
applicable 
General data management 
58 
31 
10 
55 
26 
Statistical data analysis 
45 
12 
10 
9 
104 
General data analysis 
39 
7 
14 
18 
102 
Data repository 
34 
32 
17 
38 
59 
Data curation 
33 
27 
1 
40 
79 
Data visualization 
31 
7 
7 
29 
106 
Data documentation 
25 
33 
10 
28 
84 
Spatial data analysis 
24 
10 
7 
5 
134 
Qualitative data analysis 
21 
3 
7 
5 
144 
Programming languages 
21 
3 
7 
5 
144 
Data management plans 
18 
13 
5 
40 
104 
Data discovery 
13 
11 
6 
67 
83 
Data sharing 
7 
7 
7 
64 
95 
Data policy 
6 
2 
3 
38 
131 
Data storage 
2 
6 
1 
22 
149 
Data organization 
1 
1 
0 
17 
161 
Data security 
0 
3 
3 
11 
163 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
156 
 
B) 
 
Required 
qualifications 
Preferred 
qualifications 
Responsibilities 
Description 
Not 
applicable 
Data repository 
51 
32 
33 
5 
59 
Statistical data 
analysis 
45 
23 
5 
3 
104 
Data documentation 
38 
30 
21 
7 
84 
Programming 
languages 
33 
28 
0 
0 
119 
Data visualization 
30 
15 
26 
3 
106 
Data management 
plans 
24 
12 
33 
7 
104 
General data 
management 
24 
73 
51 
6 
26 
Spatial data analysis 
24 
17 
3 
2 
134 
General data analysis 
18 
42 
15 
3 
102 
Data curation 
17 
44 
38 
2 
79 
Qualitative data 
analysis 
13 
18 
4 
1 
144 
Data sharing 
8 
12 
50 
15 
95 
Data discovery 
7 
23 
57 
10 
83 
Data policy 
6 
5 
31 
7 
131 
Data security 
3 
3 
8 
3 
163 
Data storage 
2 
7 
13 
9 
149 
Data organization 
0 
2 
6 
11 
161 
 
 
