The socioecological benefits and consequences of oil palm cultivation in its native range: The Sustainable Oil Palm in West Africa (SOPWA) Project  BBSRC   Liberia Business Visa   St Edmund's College, Cambridge   Cambridge Philosophical Society   Jesus College Oxford   Varley Gradwell Travelling Fellowship in Insect Ecology (University of Oxford   European Union   NERC National   NERC C-CLEAR Research Experience Placement  REP   King's College Cambridge   Cambridge-Africa ALBORADA Research Fund   NERC   Marshall Aid Commemoration Commission  MACC         22 March 2024   Michael  D  Pashkevich   Insect Ecology Group, Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge, CB2 3EJ, United Kingdom  Department of Zoology  Insect Ecology Group  University of Cambridge  Downing Street  CB2 3EJ  Cambridge  United Kingdom    Natural Resources Institute Finland (Luke), Latokartanonkaari 9, 00790 Helsinki, Finland  Natural Resources Institute Finland (Luke)  Latokartanonkaari 9  00790  Helsinki  Finland     Cicely  A M  Marshall   Forest Ecology and Conservation Group, Department of Plant Sciences, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge, CB2 3EJ, United Kingdom  Department of Plant Sciences  Forest Ecology and Conservation Group  University of Cambridge  Downing Street  CB2 3EJ  Cambridge  United Kingdom     Benedictus  Freeman   College of Agriculture and Forestry, Fendall Campus, University of Liberia, Montserrado County, Liberia  College of Agriculture and Forestry  Fendall Campus  University of Liberia  Montserrado County  Liberia     Valentine  J  Reiss- Woolever    Jean-Pierre  Caliman   Insect Ecology Group, Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge, CB2 3EJ, United Kingdom  Department of Zoology  Insect Ecology Group  University of Cambridge  Downing Street  CB2 3EJ  Cambridge  United Kingdom    Sinar Mas Agro Resources and Technology Research Institute (SMARTRI), Jalan Teuku Umar 19, Pekanbaru, 28112, Riau, Indonesia  Sinar Mas Agro Resources and Technology Research Institute (SMARTRI)  Jalan Teuku Umar 19  28112  Pekanbaru  Riau  Indonesia     Julia  Drewer   UK Centre for Ecology & Hydrology, Bush Estate, Penicuik, EH26 0QB, United Kingdom  Centre for Ecology & Hydrology  UK  Bush Estate  EH26 0QB  Penicuik  United Kingdom     Becky  Heath   Insect Ecology Group, Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge, CB2 3EJ, United Kingdom  Department of Zoology  Insect Ecology Group  University of Cambridge  Downing Street  CB2 3EJ  Cambridge  United Kingdom     Matthew  T  Hendren   School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Environmental and Life Sciences, University of Southampton, SO17 1BJ, United Kingdom  School of Biological Sciences  Faculty of Environmental and Life Sciences  University of Southampton  SO17 1BJ  United Kingdom     Ari  Saputra   Golden Veroleum Liberia, 17 th St, Monrovia, Liberia  Golden Veroleum Liberia  17 th St  Monrovia  Liberia     Jake  Stone   Insect Ecology Group, Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge, CB2 3EJ, United Kingdom  Department of Zoology  Insect Ecology Group  University of Cambridge  Downing Street  CB2 3EJ  Cambridge  United Kingdom     Jonathan  H  Timperley   Insect Ecology Group, Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge, CB2 3EJ, United Kingdom  Department of Zoology  Insect Ecology Group  University of Cambridge  Downing Street  CB2 3EJ  Cambridge  United Kingdom     William  Draper   College of Agriculture and Forestry, Fendall Campus, University of Liberia, Montserrado County, Liberia  College of Agriculture and Forestry  Fendall Campus  University of Liberia  Montserrado County  Liberia     Abednego  Gbarway   Forestry Development Authority of the Government of Liberia, Whein Town, Mount Barclay, Liberia  Forestry Development Authority  Government of Liberia  Whein Town  Mount Barclay  Liberia     Bility  Geninyan   Forestry Development Authority of the Government of Liberia, Whein Town, Mount Barclay, Liberia  Forestry Development Authority  Government of Liberia  Whein Town  Mount Barclay  Liberia     Blamah  Goll   Forestry Development Authority of the Government of Liberia, Whein Town, Mount Barclay, Liberia  Forestry Development Authority  Government of Liberia  Whein Town  Mount Barclay  Liberia     Marshall  Guahn   College of Agriculture and Forestry, Fendall Campus, University of Liberia, Montserrado County, Liberia  College of Agriculture and Forestry  Fendall Campus  University of Liberia  Montserrado County  Liberia     Andrew  N  Gweh   College of Agriculture and Forestry, Fendall Campus, University of Liberia, Montserrado County, Liberia  College of Agriculture and Forestry  Fendall Campus  University of Liberia  Montserrado County  Liberia     Peter  Hadfield   Ecology Solutions Ltd, Unit 4 Cokenach Estate, Royston, SG8 8DL, United Kingdom  Ecology Solutions Ltd  Unit 4 Cokenach Estate  SG8 8DL  Royston  United Kingdom     Morris  T  Jah   Forestry Development Authority of the Government of Liberia, Whein Town, Mount Barclay, Liberia  Forestry Development Authority  Government of Liberia  Whein Town  Mount Barclay  Liberia     Samuel  Jayswen   Sonouhn's Town, Sinoe County, Liberia  Sonouhn's Town  Sinoe County  Liberia     Tiecanna  Jones   Graduate School of Environmental Studies and Climate Change, University of Liberia, Capitol Hill, Monrovia, Liberia  Graduate School of Environmental Studies and Climate Change  University of Liberia  Capitol Hill  Monrovia  Liberia     Samuel  Kandie   Numopoh, Sinoe County, Liberia  Numopoh  Sinoe County  Liberia     Daniel  Koffa   Kabada Town, Sinoe County, Liberia  Kabada Town  Sinoe County  Liberia     Judith  Korb   Evolutionary Biology & Ecology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg D-79104, Germany  Evolutionary Biology & Ecology  University of Freiburg  D-79104  Freiburg  Germany     Nehemiah  Koon   Worto's Town, Sinoe County, Liberia  Worto's Town  Sinoe County  Liberia    q Butaw, Sinoe County, Liberia  q Butaw  Sinoe County  Liberia     Benedict  Manewah    Lourdes  M  Medrano   Department of Biology, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 3SZ, UK  Department of Biology  University of Oxford  OX1 3SZ  Oxford  UK     Ana  F  Palmeirim   CIBIO, Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos, InBIO Laboratório Associado, Campus de Vairão, Universidade do Porto, 4485-661 Vairão, Portugal  Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos  InBIO Laboratório Associado  Campus de Vairão  CIBIO  Universidade do Porto  4485-661  Vairão  Portugal    BIOPOLIS Program in Genomics, Biodiversity and Land Planning, CIBIO, Campus de Vairão, 4485-661 Vairão, Portugal  Biodiversity and Land Planning  BIOPOLIS Program in Genomics  CIBIO  Campus de Vairão  4485-661  Vairão  Portugal     Brogan  Pett   SpiDiverse, Biodiversity Inventory for Conservation (BINCO), 3380 Walmersumstraat, Glabbeek, Belgium  SpiDiverse  Biodiversity Inventory for Conservation (BINCO)  3380 Walmersumstraat  Glabbeek  Belgium    Centre for Ecology and Conservation, Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Exeter, Penryn Campus, Cornwall, UK  Department of Life and Environmental Sciences  Centre for Ecology and Conservation  University of Exeter  Penryn Campus  Cornwall  UK    w Bioh's Town, Sinoe County, Liberia  Bioh's Town  Sinoe County  Liberia     Ricardo  Rocha   Department of Biology, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 3SZ, UK  Department of Biology  University of Oxford  OX1 3SZ  Oxford  UK     Evangeline  Swope-Nyantee   Forestry Development Authority of the Government of Liberia, Whein Town, Mount Barclay, Liberia  Forestry Development Authority  Government of Liberia  Whein Town  Mount Barclay  Liberia     Jimmy  Tue    Josiah  Tuolee   Wiah's Town, Sinoe County, Liberia  Wiah's Town  Sinoe County  Liberia     Pieter  Van Dessel   Golden Veroleum Liberia, 17 th St, Monrovia, Liberia  Golden Veroleum Liberia  17 th St  Monrovia  Liberia     Abraham  Vincent   Forestry Development Authority of the Government of Liberia, Whein Town, Mount Barclay, Liberia  Forestry Development Authority  Government of Liberia  Whein Town  Mount Barclay  Liberia     Romeo  Weah   Forestry Development Authority of the Government of Liberia, Whein Town, Mount Barclay, Liberia  Forestry Development Authority  Government of Liberia  Whein Town  Mount Barclay  Liberia     Rudy  Widodo   Golden Veroleum Liberia, 17 th St, Monrovia, Liberia  Golden Veroleum Liberia  17 th St  Monrovia  Liberia     Alfred  J  Yennego   College of Agriculture and Forestry, Fendall Campus, University of Liberia, Montserrado County, Liberia  College of Agriculture and Forestry  Fendall Campus  University of Liberia  Montserrado County  Liberia     Jerry  Yonmah   Forestry Development Authority of the Government of Liberia, Whein Town, Mount Barclay, Liberia  Forestry Development Authority  Government of Liberia  Whein Town  Mount Barclay  Liberia     Edgar  C  Turner   Insect Ecology Group, Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge, CB2 3EJ, United Kingdom  Department of Zoology  Insect Ecology Group  University of Cambridge  Downing Street  CB2 3EJ  Cambridge  United Kingdom     William  R  Tolbert  Jr    Paulo  Pereira    Insect Ecology Group, Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge, CB2 3EJ, United Kingdom.  Department of Zoology  Insect Ecology Group  University of Cambridge  Downing Street  CB2 3EJ  Cambridge  United Kingdom     The socioecological benefits and consequences of oil palm cultivation in its native range: The Sustainable Oil Palm in West Africa (SOPWA) Project   22 March 2024    BB029CAD8DD61E936205A37B2CA8309F  10.1016/j.scitotenv.2024.171850  Received 5 December 2023; Received in revised form 19 March 2024; Accepted 19 March 2024     GROBID - A machine learning software for extracting information from scholarly documents       change Tropical agriculture Community agriculture Elaeis guineensis Sub-Saharan Africa   Oil palm is a globally important crop but cultivation in Africa is understudied.  • We use systematic mapping and a new programme-the SOPWA Project-to fill this gap.  • Our mapping reveals no studies on the whole-ecosystem impacts of African oil palm cultivation.  • SOPWA data suggest traditionally-and industrially 



    Introduction Agriculture is a dominant ecosystem globally (Ramankutty et al., 2018;  Song et al., 2018) ; in 2023, farmland and pastureland occupied nearly 50 % (about 48 million km 2 ) of habitable terrestrial land  (Ritchie and Roser, 2021) .   Since the early 2000s, rates of global agricultural expansion have fallen, but agriculture is still expanding rapidly in the tropics (Ramankutty et al., 2018;  Song et al., 2018) .   Expansion of tropical agriculture has been driven by a growing human population, increases in per capita consumption rates for agricultural-derived resources, and the high economic value of agriculture in many tropical countries (Curtis et al., 2018;  Ramankutty et al., 2018) .   While tropical agricultural production can increase food security and support human health and livelihoods, conversion of natural tropical habitat to farms and pastures has had severe environmental consequences and changed social dynamics (Drescher et al., 2016;  Santika et al., 2020) .  

 In recent years, substantial research activity has aimed to identify strategies to make tropical agriculture more sustainable, i.e., to maintain or increase levels of food production in the long-term while mitigating the ecological and sociocultural impacts of cultivation (e.g., Luke et al., 2020) .   A key first step is identifying how cultivation affects local ecological and sociocultural dynamics.  Although this has been done in many tropical contexts, large research gaps remain.  From a spatial perspective, this is especially true in the African tropics.  For example, a recent meta-analysis on the impacts of tropical agriculture on biodiversity found roughly 1.5 and 2.6 times more studies in the American and Asian tropics, than in the African tropics, respectively (Oakley and Bicknell, 2022) .   Traditional on-the-ground data collection (e.g., field surveys) is key to overcoming this knowledge gap and identifying the impacts of agriculture in poorly studied tropical regions.  Yet, such data are often rare, owing to the challenge of collecting high-quality field data in remote or isolated areas and limited resources and availability of long-term funding in these regions. 

 Oil palm (Elaeis guineensis) is a cash crop that is grown widely across the tropics to produce palm oil: the most traded vegetable oil worldwide (USDA, 2023) .   Oil palm is economically important in producing regions (e.g., in 2019 alone, Indonesia's palm oil exports were valued at >16 billion USD (Statistik Perkebunan Unggulan Nasional 2019  -2021  , 2021) , and it underpins the livelihoods of farmers in >45 official development assistance (ODA) countries (DAC List of  ODA Recipients, 2023;  FAOSTAT, 2023) .   Further, owing to its high productivity (oil palm yields 2.5-6 times more oil per unit area than soybean and oilseed rape, the next most grown vegetable oil crops), cultivation is essential to achieving global food security goals (Meijaard et al., 2020) .   However, oil palm plantations have also replaced >19.5 Mha of native tropical habitat (mostly lowland rainforest but also peatlands (Warren-Thomas et al., 2022) and savanna  (Fleiss et al., 2022) ), driving declines in biodiversity  (Barnes et al., 2014) and rates of ecosystem functioning  (Dislich et al., 2017) , and increasing greenhouse gas emissions  (Drewer et al., 2021;  Mori, 2023) .   For instance, a study in Indonesia (Barnes et al., 2014) showed that conversion of rainforest to oil palm caused plot-level species diversity, density, and biomass of invertebrates to decline by >45 %, and led to a 50 % reduction in energy fluxes (an indicator of multitrophic ecosystem functioning).  

 Most oil palm production occurs in Southeast Asia (Corley and Tinker, 2016, p. 12) .   Approximately 95 % of closed-canopy oil palm is in this region (Descals et al., 2021) , with Indonesia and Malaysia alone producing about 80 % of the global palm oil supply  (USDA, 2023) .   In Southeast Asia, oil palm is usually grown in three contexts: (1) by largescale corporations in an industrial plantation-style setting (i.e., as a monoculture and with high chemical input, 'industrial oil palm'), ( 2 ) by individual farmers on variously-sized plots of land usually <50 ha in size ('smallholder oil palm'), or (3) by networks of smallholder farmers who receive technical assistance from large-scale corporations ('plasma oil palm' or 'nucleus oil palm')  (Reiss-Woolever et al., 2021) .   Owing to the high levels of cultivation in Southeast Asia, most of our understanding of oil palm as a crop-and how its cultivation affects ecological and sociocultural dynamics-comes from this region.  For instance, a recent systematic map on oil palm globally that quantified the extent of social, ecological, and interdisciplinary research found that nearly 75 % of studies occurred in Southeast Asia, out of a total of 443 (Reiss-Woolever et al., 2021) .   Of the remainder, 15 % were in Latin America, 8 % in Africa, and 1 % in Oceania.  An associated systematic mapping exercise that focussed on within-plantation management practices found that 80 % of studies occurred in Southeast Asia (10 % in Latin America and 4 % in Africa) (Popkin et al., 2022) .  

 However, oil palm cultivation is increasing rapidly outside of Southeast Asia, owing to rising employment costs, reduced land availability, and tighter environmental regulations in the region (Davis et al., 2020;  Descals et al., 2021) .   The extent to which Southeast Asia-based findings are applicable to other regions where oil palm is grown is largely unknown.  Africa is becoming a hub of palm oil production (Davis et al., 2020;  Descals et al., 2021) .   Oil palm has been grown commercially in Africa since at least the eighteenth century, and using industrial plantation-style methods since about 1909 (Corley and Tinker, 2016, p. 5) .   Angola, Benin, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, and Nigeria were the major African palm oil suppliers throughout most of the twentieth century (although Cameroon increased production from about 1985 onwards) (Corley and Tinker, 2016, p. 5) .   By 2012, the top-producing countries were Nigeria (940 kt of oil producer per year (kt yr -1 )), Ghana (420 kt yr -1 ), Côte d'Ivoire (420 kt yr -1 ), and Cameroon (245 kt yr -1 ) (Corley and Tinker, 2016, p. 12) .   Increases in African oil palm cultivation have been driven both by large-scale corporations and smallholder farmers.  For instance, recent expansion in Southeast Liberia has been driven almost entirely by large-scale corporations (Davis et al., 2020) , but expansion in Southwest Cameroon has been driven largely by smallholders  (Ordway et al., 2017) .  

 There are at least five key reasons why oil palm cultivation may have different impacts in Africa compared to other regions, precluding the application of Southeast Asia-based findings in African contexts, and making the case for why increased oil palm-focussed research in Africa is required urgently.  First, there are extensive climatic and geophysical differences across the tropics.  For instance, in comparison to Southeast Asia, many producing regions in Africa experience a drier climate and lower levels of solar radiation, both factors that influence oil palm growth and production and therefore the relative environmental impacts of palm oil production (Lamade et al., 1996;  Rhebergen et al., 2016) .   Second, oil palm is native to Africa, having evolved in West Africa, and is found commonly today in lowland rainforest areas across West and Central Africa (Maizura et al., 2006) .   It has therefore coevolved with other African species, possibly increasing the number of diseases and pests present, but potentially also resulting in heightened resilience against diseases and pests and higher numbers of beneficial interactions that enhance the delivery of key ecosystem services, such as pollination, that boost production.  Tailored management-different from regions where oil palm has been introduced-is needed to account for these unique ecological dynamics, which could also result in more muted or stronger environmental impacts of cultivation.  Third, because oil palm is native to Africa, it is cultivated using traditional approaches in addition to the smallholder, plasma, and industrial approaches that are practised in Southeast Asia and Latin America.  Traditional approaches often involve harvesting from naturally-occurring groves of oil palms in lowland rainforest areas.  Very little information is available about the impacts of traditional approaches to oil palm cultivation; how oil palm is used by local African people for food, medicinal, cultural, or other purposes; or how traditional cultivation practises vary across geographic space and cultural groups.  Fourth, industrial-style expansion of oil palm in parts of Africa is being driven by Southeast Asia-owned companies (Davis et al., 2020) , some of which implement management practises that were developed in Southeast Asia and could therefore have a different impact within Africa's unique ecological and sociocultural contexts.   Fifth, there are substantial sociocultural differences between and within African, Southeast Asian, and Latin American cultural groups, owing to unique histories and current cultural and political dynamics in each region.  As oil palm cultivation is inherently an ecological and sociocultural process, the impacts of production will be determined largely by the people affected by-and driving-its growth. 

 Additional ecological and sociocultural studies on the impacts of oil palm cultivation in an African context are needed urgently.  However, the large-scale, field-based studies that are required to fill knowledge gaps around the impacts of oil palm cultivation in Africaand therefore lay the groundwork for more sustainable palm oil production in this regionare lacking (we point to the SAFE Project (Ewers et al., 2011) ; EFForTS-Programme  (Drescher et al., 2016) ; and BEFTA Programme  (Luke et al., 2020) as flagship studies of this kind in Southeast Asia).   In this paper, we introduce a new large-scale, field-based studythe Sustainable Oil Palm in West Africa (SOPWA) Projectthat is investigating the relative socioecological impacts of oil palm cultivation in Southeast Liberia (West Africa).  Importantly, our study-which is co-developed between academic, oil palm industry, government, and local community partners-considers both traditional and industrial approaches to oil palm cultivation, and compares conditions in these systems to rainforest, which is the dominant habitat in the study region and often a source of new oil palm farms, as a reference native habitat.  Our paper is twofold in focus.  First, we use systematic mapping methods to appraise the literature of oil palm-focussed studies in Africa, assessing the geographic and disciplinary focus of research to date and identifying clusters of research activity and knowledge gaps that preclude the development of moresustainable oil palm cultivation in Africa.  We then introduce the SOPWA Project, detailing our study region and ecological monitoring plots and-using canopy cover, ground vegetation cover, and soil temperature data as a case study-showcase the utility of our study design for assessing differences between rainforest and traditional and industrial oil palm systems. 



 Methods  Systematic mapping of research on oil palm in Africa We used systematic mapping to quantify the extent and focus of existing research on oil palm in Africa and to identify knowledge gaps relating to traditional uses of oil palm and the ecological and sociocultural impacts of cultivation.  Systematic mapping involves using a detailed procedure to locate, classify, and describe existing literature on a subject (James et al., 2016) .   In comparison to other recent oil palmrelated systematic maps (e.g., Popkin et al., 2022;  Reiss-Woolever et al., 2021) , our methods specifically target-and therefore more comprehensively assess-oil palm-related research in an African context (i.e., primary research based in Africa or occurring outside of Africa but, for instance, focussing on an oil palm germplasm that was collected in Africa or an oil palm-relevant species (e.g., Fusarium oxysporum f. sp.   elaeidis) that was collected in Africa but examined elsewhere) and reported an ecological, socioeconomic, or interdisciplinary outcome.  We concentrated on the disciplinary and geographic focus of studies over time, and did not appraise the quality of studies.  We did not apply a date or language restriction (translating any non-English studies using Google Translate as needed and possible), although our methods are still biased linguistically since we only ran our search string in English.  We adapted our methods from standard best practices published by the Collaboration for Environmental Evidence Systematic Review Guidelines (Sutherland et al., 2019) , resulting in a five-stage workflow, the full details of which are in Supplementary Text 1 and Supplementary Fig.  1 .  

 We found 757 unique publications which met our inclusion criteria.  For these studies, we classed their scope(s) and outcome(s) into parent categories (Study scope parent categories: Interventions, Comparisons, Contexts; Outcome parent categories: Environmental Conditions, Production, Social Dynamics; Fig. 1 ) and concentric sub-categories (hereafter called "codes", Fig.  1 ; see Supplementary Tables  1 and  2 for parent category and code definitions for study scopes and outcomes, respectively).   We established parent categories and codes from our existing knowledge of the global oil palm literature and consulting related systematic maps (e.g., Reiss-Woolever et al., 2021) , adjusting our categories and codes as needed after reviewing the first 10 % of publications (Supplementary Text 1).   All categories and codes were known to be potentially fruitful areas of work, to allow identification of research clusters and knowledge gaps.  We allowed individual publications to fit into multiple parent categories and codes, as applicable.  Therefore, the total number of individual (hereafter, 'occurrences') and co-occurring scopes and outcomes exceeds the number of publications.  We also recorded date of publication, and the country (or countries) in which publications occurred (for which we also noted if the publication focussed on research across Africa (i.e., in no specific country) or if research occurred outside Africa but met our inclusion criteria (e.g., studies that used oil palm germplasms collected from Senegal, but with research taking place in Malaysia)).  In line with our aim of identifying areas of research focus and knowledge gaps relating to traditional uses of oil palm and the impacts of cultivation, we also recorded whether studies focussed on traditional diets, uses, or practices associated with oil palm, if they were conservation oriented, and whether they were whole-ecosystem in focus (i.e., involving a range of taxonomic groups and ecosystem processes). 

 We analysed and visualised our findings using R (R Core Team, 2023) in RStudio (RStudio Team, 2023) using packages tidyverse (Wickham et al., 2019) and pheatmap  (Kolde, 2022) .   First, we visualised changes in study frequency over time.  Second, we assessed whether the location of studies (assessed at country-level) tracked to palm oil production.  To do 1 and  2 .   Full details of our systematic mapping methodology are provided in Supplementary Text 1. OP = oil palm. 

 this, we extracted country-level data on palm oil production (tonnes of oil produced, 'Production') from the database of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAOSTAT, 2023), using 2019 values to prevent influence of the COVID-19 pandemic on our findings.  We acknowledge that FAO crop production data can be biased, for instance, country-level statistics rarely include data from home gardens, which are common in sub-Saharan Africa (Galhena et al., 2013) .   Therefore, these data may be more indicative of production that influences national trade (FAOSTAT, 2023) .   Before plotting these data, we excluded publications that occurred across Africa generally (i.e., in no specific country; 36 studies) and publications that occurred outside of Africa (e.g., studies in Malaysia that worked with oil palm germplasms from Senegal; 63 studies).  A total of 658 publications remained.  We did not assess whether the location of studies tracked to palm wine production, as palm oil is the dominant oil palm product globally and statistics on palm wine are less available.  Finally, we produced a heatmap to assess areas of research focus (i.e., co-occurrences between study scopes and outcomes) and to identify knowledge gaps relating to traditional uses and impacts of oil palm cultivation.  We included data from all 757 publications in our heatmap. 



 The Sustainable Oil Palm in West Africa (SOPWA) Project: A wholeecosystem approach to understanding the relative impacts of traditional and industrial approaches to oil palm cultivation in Liberia 2.2.1. Study site Our new projectthe Sustainable Oil Palm in West Africa (SOPWA) Projectoccurs in Sinoe County, Liberia (West Africa) (Fig. 2 ), an area in which oil palm is native and where it has likely been harvested by local people for thousands of years  (Corley and Tinker, 2016, p. 1;  Kay et al., 2019) .   Sinoe County falls within the forest zone of West Africa (Upper Guinea in the phytogeographical literature, and included in the West African Forests ecoregion), running from Sierra Leone in the west to the Dahomey Gap (Ghana) in the east, from the coast up to 350 km inland (Marshall et al., 2021;  White, 1979) .   The typical flora is lowland evergreen rainforest, with variations in species composition driven by gradients in rainfall, disturbance and local topology, with altitude and historical climatic stability important at broader geographical scales (Marshall et al., 2022) .   This area is recognised as a biodiversity hotspot (Myers et al., 2000;  Olson et al., 2001) , for instance, it is home to a high concentration of globally rare plant species  (Bongers et al., 2004;  Marshall et al., 2016  Marshall et al., , 2022)) .   Liberia retains the highest density of rainforest in West Africa, although about one-fifth of its forested area has been lost to agricultural, logging, and mining activities (Davis et al., 2020) .   Most of this deforestation has occurred since 2003, when 15 years of domestic conflict ended and after which the Government of Liberia sold large areas of land to foreign investors as part of its economic re-development plan (Davis et al., 2020) .   Sinoe County has an estimated 891,806 ha of forest (about 88 % of its total area), and is the most forested county in Liberia (Forestry Development Authority, 2019).  In Sinoe County, mean annual temperature is 25.4 • C, and mean annual rainfall is 3633 mm (calculated over 1970  -2000;  (WorldClim, 2023) ).   Sinoe County experiences two wet (April -June; September -October) and dry (July -August; November -March) seasons annually (Supplementary Fig. 2 ).  

 Traditionally, local people in Sinoe County have relied on shifting cultivation for their livelihoods.  This involves burning small areas (often around 1 ha) of rainforest annually to improve soil fertility for cultivation of a variety of crops, including rice, cassava, yams, and banana (Sinoe County Development Agenda, 2012).  Burning usually occurs at the end of the dry season (typically February or March), with crops planted soon after as the rainy season begins.  When preparing lands for farming, local people often choose areas with wild-growing oil palms (called 'country palms' by local communities), which are fire-tolerant and therefore survive the burning process (Sowunmi, 1999) .   The density of palms within local farms varies, but care is taken to ensure that the density of palms is low enough to allow other crops, such as cassava, to receive sunlight, even if the country palms are fully grown.  Country palms are a food staple in this region, with local people using the palms to produce products such as cooking oil and palm wine. 

 Oil palm is also cultivated in Sinoe County in industrial farms (although "plantation" is commonly used to describe industrial oil palm settings, we specifically use "farm" in line with the oil palm terminology used in Liberia), most of which were established by Golden Veroleum Liberia (GVL).  GVL is the largest oil palm developer in Liberia and a member of the Golden Agri-Resources (GAR) group, a Singapore-based company that manages oil palm farms in thirteen countries.  Other industrial oil palm farms in Liberia are found in Grand Cape Mount and Gbarpolu Counties (originally established by Sime Darby and now owned by Mano Palm Oil Industries) and Grand Gedeh County (originally established by the Liberian Ministry of Agriculture, and now managed by community cooperatives).  In 2010, the Government of Liberia and GVL signed a Concession Agreement, which granted GVL a concession area of 220,000 ha of non-private land across the Counties of Sinoe, Grand Kru, Maryland, River Cess, and River Gee on which to conduct activities related to the production of oil palm products (Government of Liberia, 2010).  When the Concession Agreement was signed, about 80 % of the GVL concession area was forested (i.e., having tree cover with >50 % canopy density; Global Forest Watch, 2014), with the remainder being other land types including existing smallholder agriculture and savanna (but with no savanna in Sinoe County).  Owing to this, forest is the most appropriate baseline in Southeast Liberia, although the country palm approach to cultivation could also be viewed as a baseline in situations when existing agriculture is converted to industrial oil palm farms in the region.  GVL is currently cultivating oil palm on ∼ 19,000 ha of its concession area, and has set-aside almost 11,500 ha as High Conservation Value (HCV) areas.  GVL established its first oil palm farms in Sinoe County in 2012, and currently has six oil palm farms in the County: Tarjuowon-North, Tarjuowon-South, Butaw, Kpayan, Tartweh, and Kabada. 



 Study aim, design, and surveys conducted to date The SOPWA Project is investigating the relative socioecological impacts of traditional and industrial oil palm cultivation.  The core of our project is 54 monitoring plots, established in February 2022 and each measuring 50 × 50 m in area (Supplementary Table 3 ), which span a 56 km distance in Sinoe County, Liberia (Fig.  2 ) and in three distinct systems:  

 1) Forest -These plots are in areas of old-growth Western Guinean lowland rainforest with no record of substantial disturbance.  These areas are owned by GVL (called the 'GVL buffer', as they surround GVL's oil palm farms), and are used by local people for hunting, harvesting of non-timber forest products (NTFPs), and spiritual and cultural purposes.  We placed plots in areas where the forest was continuous (i.e., we did not place plots in isolated forest fragments surrounded by oil palm or other habitats).  As about 88 % of Sinoe County is forested, and forest is frequently a source of new farms, it is an ideal reference habitat (Forestry Development Authority, 2019). 

 2) Country palm -These plots are in fallowed traditional farms, established using slash-and-burn practises as described above.  Farms had been abandoned for at least two years (mean: 7.6 years; range: 2-30 years; Supplementary Table 4 ), but local people still maintain and visit the area to harvest country palms (i.e., wild-growing palms, which either survived the burning process or established naturally after farms were fallowed).   Various crops had been farmed previously in country palm plots, with the most commonly farmed crops being rice and cassava (each farmed in 14 plots), and cucumber, pepper, and bitterball (each farmed in 12 plots) (Supplementary Table 4 ).   Today, these are areas of dense regrowth (called "low bush" by local communities).  We found plots by asking local community members where they harvest their oil palm fruits.  Chemical fertilisers, herbicides, or pesticides have never been applied within these plots.  Although rainforest is the most representative reference habitat in Sinoe County, country palm could also be viewed as a baseline in situations when existing agriculture is converted to industrial oil palm farms. 

 3) Industrial oil palm -These plots are in GVL oil palm farms.  Farms are organised into 300 × 1000 m blocks, separated by dirt roads, with palms planted approximately 8 m apart in a staggered design.  All farms are oil palm monocultures, intersected by riparian reserves (composed of native rainforest, and ranging from about 25-125 m in width from either riverside) and conserved forest fragments (typically where villages were previously, and therefore fragments are differently sized and valuable culturally to local communities).  The farms were not managed identically, but were all managed according to business-as-usual practices that were developed in Sumatra, Indonesia, including regular application of fertilisers, herbicides, and pesticides (when outbreaks of insect pests occur).  Palms are harvested manually (using a chisel for younger palms, and a harvesting sickle on a telescopic pole for taller, more mature palms) at 10-15 day intervals.  In comparison to country palms, industrial oil palms consist of high-yielding varieties purchased from the suppliers PalmElit, Socfindo, and Dami Mas.  When our project started in February 2022, palms in our plots were aged between four and ten years (i.e., all were fruiting), with 50 % of palms in plots being aged six or seven years (Supplementary Table 5 ).  

 Our plots are arranged in six clusters, located in and around each of the six GVL oil palm farms in Sinoe County (Fig. 2 ).   There are nine plots in each cluster (three plots per system per cluster), and we have ensured that same-system plots within a cluster are at least 400 m apart to minimise spatial correlation (mean: 1853 m apart; range: 442-5530 m apart).  The mean elevation of plots is 116 m above sea level (range: 14-211 m above sea level) (Supplementary Table 3 ).   We aimed to place forest and industrial oil palm plots at least 200 m from GVL farms and surrounding forest, respectively, as studies from Southeast Asia show that this distance is sufficient to prevent edge effects on tropical rainforest and agricultural communities (Chapman et al., 2019;  Lucey and Hill, 2012) .   However, two forest plots are within this distance (149 and 159 m from the surrounding oil palm), and the mean distance of forest plots from GVL farms is 256 m (range: 149-433 m).  The mean distance of industrial oil palm plots from surrounding forest is 616 m (range: 306-1093 m).  We aimed to place country palm plots at least 200 m from GVL farms to mitigate the influence of farms on ecological processes within the country palm plots.  However, as the location of country palm plots was determined by where local communities had previously farmed and still harvested country palms, this was not always possible, and the mean distance of country palm plots from GVL farms is 602 m (range: 72-1212 m). 

 We have so far surveyed our plots in February -March 2022 and January -February 2023, assessing environmental conditions, the biodiversity of a range of taxonomic groups, and levels of ecosystem functioning, to determine the relative ecological differences between rainforest, country palm, and industrial oil palm systems.  For environmental conditions, we recorded canopy cover, vegetation structural complexity, and understory vegetation cover.  For biodiversity, we surveyed trees, understory plants, birds, insectivorous bats, grounddwelling mammals, spiders, and insects.  For ecosystem functions, we measured seed removal, ant scavenging activity, forest regeneration, and soil invertebrate feeding activity.  We have also conducted sociocultural surveys, including assessing the social, cultural, medicinal, spiritual, and economic benefit of plant species in our plots to local communities.  Before any fieldwork, we met with local chiefs and communities and obtained approval for our work.  While sampling, we paid for site access and worked with and compensated local people for their time.  Local representatives were nominated from the local community, and to date have always been men.  We moved five plots (one forest plot and four country palm plots) <200 m between our 2022 and 2023 surveys, owing to slash-and-burn activity that had disturbed the previous year's plot location (Supplementary Table 3 ).  



 Demonstrating the utility of the SOPWA Project study design: Assessing differences in canopy cover, ground vegetation cover, and soil temperature across land use systems 2.2.3.1.  Data collection.  In this paper, we use canopy cover, ground vegetation cover, and soil temperature data from our plots, as a case study to demonstrate the utility of the SOPWA Project study design for investigating the ecological impacts of traditional and industrial oil palm cultivation, and to provide contextual data for forthcoming studies.  We measured canopy cover by placing an iPhone 8 on an outstretched hand at waist-height, such that the elbow formed a 90 • angle, and taking four upwards-facing photos (in each of the cardinal directions) at the corners and centre of each plot.  Using Adobe Photoshop (Version 23.3), we separated pixels containing sky or vegetation using the built-in edge detection algorithm.  We corrected for any pixels that were mistakenly assigned by making further additive selections as needed, after adjusting the tolerance parameters for hue, saturation, and luminosity in each photo.  Ground vegetation cover was measured by estimating the percent area of ground that was covered by vegetation in a 1 m 2 area at three locations in each plot (each 5 m from the plot centre at bearings 0 • , 135 • , and 225 • , and 10 m from each other).  Soil temperature was measured by burying an iButton® datalogger (Measurement Systems Ltd., Berkshire, UK) at 5 cm depth at the centre of each plot.  Dataloggers were programmed to record temperature every hour over a 48-h period.  Two dataloggers failed in the field (one each in country palm and industrial oil palm) and therefore we only collected data from 52 plots.  Canopy cover data were collected in February -March 2022, and ground vegetation cover and soil temperature data were collected in January -February 2023.  This time period corresponds to the Liberian dry season (Supplementary Fig. 2 ).  



 Statistical analysis. We analysed data using R (R Core Team, 2023) in RStudio (RStudio Team, 2023) using packages tidyverse (Wickham et al., 2019) , glmmTMB  (Magnusson et al., 2019) , cowplot  (Wilke, 2023) , DHARMa  (Hartig and Lohse, 2022) , gamm4  (Wood and Scheipl, 2020) , and multcomp  (Hothorn et al., 2023) .  

 We analysed differences in canopy cover and ground vegetation cover across systems using generalised linear mixed models (GLMMs) that were fitted to beta distributions.  Prior to analysis, we averaged canopy cover and ground vegetation cover values in each plot and used the per-plot average as our unit of analysis.  To meet the requirements of glmmTMB, we transformed our ground vegetation cover data to be between 0 and 1 prior to analysis using the equation: 

 (Y * (N -1) + 0.5 )/N  Wherein Y = the untransformed per-plot ground vegetation cover values, and N = the number of plots we sampled (i.e., 54).  We did not transform canopy cover data, as per-plot values were already between 0 and 1.  We fitted System (levels: Forest, Country palm, Industrial oil palm) as a fixed effect and Farm (levels: Tarjuowon-North, Tarjuowon-South, Butaw, Kpayan, Tartweh, Kabada) as a random intercept effect, to account for the spatial clustering of our plots in our modelling.  Our models therefore took the form: Canopy_cover ~ System + (1 | Farm) and Vegetation_cover ~ System + (1 | Farm).  We validated our models by plotting Pearson residuals against fitted values and covariates and ensuring no patterns were present (Zuur and Ieno, 2016) .   We simulated 10,000 datasets from each model, calculated dispersion statistics for each simulated dataset, and verified that the simulated dispersion statistics tracked to that of the underlying model.  We determined the significance of System to the response by comparing fitted models to null models using likelihood ratio tests (LRTs).  When System was significant (P < 0.05), we conducted pairwise post-hoc tests to determine differences between systems, using Tukey all-pair comparison tests (using glht () in multcomp (Hothorn et al., 2023) .  

 We analysed differences in soil temperature across systems using a generalised additive mixed model (GAMM).  We fitted our model to a Gaussian distribution (identity link) and fitted a smoothing function (using a 20-knot cyclic penalised cubic regression spline, multiplied by System) to the time of day at which recordings occurred, to account for System-dependent non-linearity of temperature changes across the day.  As we measured soil temperature in each plot over two days, we nested Plot within Farm as a random effect.  Our model therefore took the form: Temperature ~ System + s(Time, by = System) + (1 | Farm/Plot).  Our model validation procedure included plotting and visually inspecting quantile-quantile plots to ensure a linear pattern was present, plotting Pearson residuals against fitted values and covariates and ensuring no patterns were present, and ensuring that Pearson residuals were normally distributed.  We used analysis of variance (ANOVA) to determine the significance of covariate System (Zuur et al., 2014) .   To assess whether multiplying the smoother by System significantly improved the model, we fitted a null model (Temperature ~ System + s(Time) + (1 | Farm/Plot)) and calculated and compared the Akaike Information Criteria (AIC) for our null and fitted models.  We interpreted that the model with a higher AIC was poorer, if the difference in AICs was greater than two (Zuur et al., 2014) .   To determine differences in soil temperature between systems, we applied a Bonferroni correction to our posthoc analysis (using glht() in multcomp (Hothorn et al., 2023) ) to account for multiple comparisons.  



 Results  Systematic mapping of research on oil palm in Africa

 Temporal and spatial distribution of publications We found 757 unique publications that met our inclusion criteria, published between 1942 and 2023, with the number of studies increasing over time (Fig. 3A ) and generally tracking to global patterns in oil palm-related research (Supplementary Fig.  3 ).   After eliminating studies that did not occur in Africa but met our inclusion criteria, publications occurred in 36 African countries, with the most-represented countries being Nigeria (N = 224), Ghana (N = 112), Cameroon (N = 106), Côte d'Ivoire (N = 76), and Benin (N = 52) (Fig. 3B ).   Generally, the amount of oil palm-focussed research in each country tracked to its levels of palm oil production, although there was some variability (Fig. 3B ).   For instance, in Cameroon there have been 1.4 and 4.5 times more publications than in Côte d'Ivoire and Democratic Republic of the Congo, although levels of palm oil production between these countries are similar (in 2019, Cameroon, Côte d'Ivoire, and Democratic Republic of the Congo produced 2.62, 2.46, and 2.12 megatonnes of palm oil, respectively).  Although FAO data indicate that Uganda does not produce palm oil, five publications reported oil palm farms in the country, and we are aware of Uganda-based plantations owned by international palm oil corporation Wilmar (Wilmar International, 2024) .   São Tomé and Príncipe was the only country with FAO-reported palm oil production but no oil palm-focussed research (Fig. 3B ).  



 Extent and focus of oil palm research, and identifying knowledge gaps Study scopes included interventions (152 occurrences), comparisons (564 occurrences), and contexts (1186 occurrences).  The most studied intervention was on-farm changes in oil palm management (63 occurrences).  The most studied comparison was between oil palm and other crops ('OP vs other crops', 178 occurrences), followed by comparisons of oil palm farms ('OP farms vs OP farms', 124 occurrences) and oil palm and native habitat ('OP vs native habitat', 75 occurrences).  Oil palm production was a frequently studied context, and smallholder oil palm (86 occurrences) was slightly more studied than industrial oil palm (76 occurrences), although production settings were often not indicated and therefore indeterminable (149 occurrences).  Although oil palm is native to Africa, studies on wild oil palm groves were uncommon (28 occurrences).  Palm oil as an end product (144 occurrences) was more studied than palm wine (34 occurrences).  Studies were often purely ecological in focus (111 occurrences) or purely social in focus (87 occurrences) (Fig. 4A ).   77 publications were conservation-oriented, and 79 publications focussed on traditional diets, uses, and practices associated with oil palm. 

 Outcomes included environmental conditions (532 occurrences), production (392 occurrences), and social dynamics (500 occurrences).  The most studied environmental condition was abiotic conditions (96 occurrences); the most studied production outcome was palm oil yields (80 occurrences); and the most studied social dynamic was health and wellbeing (152 occurrences).  Although Africa is a growing hotspot of oil palm development, studies reporting on land rights and land grabbing were uncommon (20 occurrences) (Fig. 4B ).  

 The commonest area of research focus (i.e., co-occurrence of study scope and outcome) was between palm oil as an end product and human health and wellbeing (91 co-occurrences), followed by palm oil as an end product and palm oil quality (50 co-occurrences) and purely social studies and human health and wellbeing (48 co-occurrences) (Fig. 5 ).   In smallholder oil palm settings, most research focussed on social dynamics (165 co-occurrences), followed by production (41 co-occurrences) and environmental conditions (34 co-occurrences).  However, we found the opposite pattern in industrial settings, with the most research focussed on environmental conditions (70 co-occurrences), followed by production (47 co-occurrences) and social dynamics (44 co-occurrences).  In wild oil palm groves, most research focussed on environmental conditions (39 co-occurrences), namely chimpanzee behaviour (13 cooccurrences) (Fig. 5 ).  

 Our systematic map revealed several key knowledge gaps relating to traditional uses of oil palm and the ecological and sociocultural impacts of cultivation.  For instance, research on traditional diets, uses, and practices and all outcomes, aside from human health and wellbeing (43 co-occurrences), was rare.  Research on certification schemes and all outcomes was also rare, with no co-occurrences between certification schemes and environmental conditions, only one co-occurrence with production, and 7 co-occurrences with social dynamics (Fig. 5 ).   No research programme (i.e., a single publication or group of publications by similar authors and occurring in the same geographic space) has evaluated the whole-ecosystem (i.e., involving a range of taxonomic groups and ecosystem processes) impacts of oil palm cultivation in any African production setting (Supplementary Table 6 ).  



 The Sustainable Oil Palm in West Africa (SOPWA) Project: A wholeecosystem approach to understanding the relative impacts of traditional and industrial approaches to oil palm cultivation in Liberia Our case study-in which we demonstrate the utility of the SOPWA Project study design for investigating the ecological impacts of traditional and industrial oil palm cultivation-indicated differences in canopy cover (LRT = 24.693,  P System < 0.001), ground vegetation cover (LRT = 61.743,  P System < 0.001), and soil temperature (F = 22.23, P System < 0.001) across rainforest, country palm, and industrial oil palm systems (Fig. 6A-C ).   Canopy cover in rainforest (X‾ (mean) ± SE (standard error) = 91.3  % ± 0.9 %) was 1.3 and 1.4 times higher than in country palm (68.2 % ± 3.8 %, P Comparison < 0.001) and industrial oil palm (65.2 % ± 5.3 %, P Comparison < 0.001), respectively (Fig. 6A ).   Ground vegetation cover in rainforest (97.8 % ± 0.2 %) was 1.3 and 1.7 times higher than in country palm (72.8 % ± 3.8 %, P Comparison < 0.001) and industrial oil palm (56.4 % ± 4.3 %, P Comparison < 0.001), respectively.  Ground vegetation cover in country palm was 1.3 times higher than in industrial oil palm (P Comparison = 0.002) (Fig. 6B ).   Soil temperature varied significantly across the day in all systems (P Smoother < 0.001 for all; AIC Fitted = 3909, AIC Null = 4854), but the degree of variability was not the same.  Cross-day variability in industrial oil palm (24--36.5 • C) was higher than that in country palm (23.5-29.0  • C, P Comparison < 0.001) and rainforest (24.0-26.0  • C, P Comparison < 0.001).  We did not detect differences in cross-day variability between rainforest and country palm, but temperatures between these systems varied substantially in the afternoon.  Differences between all three systems peaked at 16.00, when average soil temperature was 28.3 • C in industrial oil palm, 26.5 • C in country palm, and 25.4 • C in rainforest (Fig. 6C ).  



 Discussion In this paper, we introduce the Sustainable Oil Palm in West Africa 1 and  2 .  

 (SOPWA) Project.  To contextualise the Project, we provided a systematic map that quantifies the extent of research on oil palm in Africa to date.  Our map demonstrated that most research has focussed on human health and livelihoods and revealed several key knowledge gaps, including that no study has yet assessed the whole-ecosystem impacts of palm oil production in Africa.  The SOPWA Project directly addresses this and is additionally assessing sociocultural impacts of production.  We demonstrated the utility of the SOPWA Project's study design to show that-in comparison to rainforests-traditional and industrial oil palm systems support lower levels of canopy cover and ground vegetation cover and have hotter and more variable soil temperatures. 



 Systematic mapping of oil palm research in Africa In comparison to Southeast Asia and Latin America, oil palmfocussed research in Africaoil palm's native rangeis uncommon (Reiss-Woolever et al., 2021) .   Ours is the most comprehensive systematic map of oil palm-focussed research in Africa to date.  We found that 1 and  2 .   research activity has increased in recent years, possibly owing to general increases in research activity worldwide but also increases in palm oil production across Africa (Davis et al., 2020) , to meet heightened demands for palm oil for use in food, cosmetics, and biofuels.   We found publications occurring in all palm oil-producing African countries, according to the FAO, except for São Tomé and Príncipe (we note that there is at least one study (De Lima et al., 2013) from São Tomé and Príncipe that sampled oil palm, but oil palm was only mentioned once in the manuscript and was not a focus of the study and therefore was not detected by our search string).   As São Tomé and Príncipe is an island nation and therefore likely supports a high number of endemic or migratory species, future studies focussing on the ecological impacts of oil palm cultivation within-country may be particularly valuable.  Publications in countries where oil palm is not reported to be grown (Burkina Faso, Malawi, Mali, Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique, Niger, South Africa, Sudan, and Uganda), according to the FAO, mostly focussed on the consumption of imported palm oil.  In a few cases (e.g., Amugoli et al., 2020;  Baguma et al., 2019;  Egonyu et al., 2021 , which occur in Uganda), data collection occurred within oil palm plantations, and this is likely an artefact of FAO data being biased towards palm oil that is exported (FAOSTAT, 2023).  

 Our systematic map indicated that the most common study scope was comparing oil palm and other crops.  In comparison, another systematic map that assessed 443 oil palm-related studies occurring worldwide found that comparisons between oil palm and native habitat were most common (Reiss-Woolever et al., 2021) .   This difference in findings could reflect a changing focus of oil palm research, as our map had a higher proportion of studies from more recent years.  While comparing oil palm to other crops and native habitat is valuable for understanding its relative ecological and sociocultural impacts, increased attention on management within farms is also needed to develop tractable strategies that enhance the sustainable production of palm oil and palm wine, and more directly inform the development of Africa-specific sustainability certification criteria and on-farm interventions that individual farmers can implement.  The most studied outcome was human health and wellbeing, broadly tracking to research patterns found globally by Reiss-Woolever et al. (2021) , and reflecting the importance of crude palm oil (also called red palm oil) in traditional African dishes and its importance as a source of Vitamin A in many African countries  (Bechoff et al., 2018) .  

 Our map indicated research in several study scopes and outcomes that are unique to an African context.  Africa-specific study scopes included studying wild-growing groves of oil palm, palm wine as an end product, historical studies focussed on human history (including ancient human history) or paleobiology, and traditional diets, uses, and practices associated with oil palm.  Africa-specific outcomes included palm wine yields and palm wine quality.  As harvesting of wild-growing oil palms, and production and consumption of palm wine, does not take place in other tropical regions, these are areas where novel research can and should be conducted.  Understanding Africa-specific contexts and outcomes of oil palm growth and production is key to unlocking moresustainable production of oil palm across Africa. 

 Although environmental outcomes were somewhat well-studied, we found that publications focussed on only one or a few taxonomic groups or ecosystem processes, and that there were no publications or research programmes that had evaluated the whole-ecosystem impacts of oil palm cultivation in Africa.  Further, studies focussed on conservation aspects were rare (about 10 % of all studies).  This is not the case in other producing regions such as Southeast Asia (Reiss-Woolever et al., 2021) .   Research is needed urgently in Africa to understand how oil palm cultivation affects native ecosystems.  This is important from both conservation and management perspectives asonce they are establishedoil palm farms could support relatively high numbers of species compared to other agricultural systems (Foster et al., 2011) , many of which provide ecosystem services that boost palm oil yields  (Dislich et al., 2017) .   Further work is therefore needed to identify and boost the biodiversity of native African species that enhance productivity and profitability in existing oil palm systems. 

 No studies investigated the impacts of sustainability certification programmes on environmental conditions, and only one study (Brako et al., 2021) and three studies  (Brako et al., 2021;  Dompreh et al., 2021;  Oosterveer et al., 2014) examined the effects of sustainability certification programmes (such as the Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil) on palm oil production and on social dynamics, respectively.   This is somewhat unsurprising, since it tracks broadly to patterns observed globally (Reiss-Woolever et al., 2021) , and because uptake of certification schemes across Africa is generally low, possibly because African farmers face barriers to becoming certified that are not present or easier to overcome in other palm oil-producing regions such as Southeast Asia, where certification uptake is much higher.   Further, most African palm oil is used and traded on the African continent rather than exported to Europe or the USA (Ordway et al., 2017) , where retailers may be more likely to demand certification  (RSPO Impact Report, 2016) .   Indeed, only 32,383 ha of oil palm in Africa (about 3 % of the total area estimate of closed-canopy oil palm) were RSPO-certified as of 2016, while in Indonesia and Malaysia alone the area of RSPO-certified oil palm was >2.30  Mha (about 12 % of the total area estimate of closed-canopy oil palm) (Descals et al., 2021;  RSPO Impact Report, 2016) .   Co-occurrences between outcomes and social and government programmes that were not certification-specific were commoner.  However, while the effects of these programmes on social dynamics were relatively well studied, we found that few studies have assessed their impacts on production or environmental conditions.  As the purpose of these social and government programmes, such as zero deforestation pledges and the Clean Development Mechanism under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) Kyoto Protocol, is to maximise palm oil production while mitigating adverse social and environmental impacts, future studies to assess their efficacy in oil palm settings in Africa are needed urgently. 

 A final potentially fruitful area for more research indicated by our cooccurrence analysis was the paucity of studies focussed on the impacts of oil palm cultivation on elections and land rights and land grabbing, despite increases in oil palm cultivation across Africa.  Such studies are needed to quantify the extent of political influence that oil palm developers can have on local communities, and to protect the rights of indigenous and other local people as oil palm cultivation continues to expand across Africa. 



 The Sustainable Oil Palm in West Africa (SOPWA) Project: A wholeecosystem approach to understanding the relative impacts of traditional and industrial approaches to oil palm cultivation in Liberia Our new research programme in Liberia-the SOPWA Project, which uses oil palm as a model tree crop to investigate the impacts of tropical agricultural production in Africa-helps to address several knowledge gaps that were revealed by our systematic mapping.  First, we are establishing baseline data on levels of biodiversity, functioning, and ecosystem processing in three African systems (forest, country palm, industrial oil palm).  As Liberia retains the highest density of structurally intact Western Guinean lowland forest (Song et al., 2018) , studying Liberia's forests will advance aims of protecting remaining intact forest areas and inform targets for initiatives to restore areas that are degraded.  

 Second, the SOPWA Project is the first to evaluate the wholeecosystem impacts of oil palm cultivation in an African context.  In this paper, we used canopy cover, ground vegetation cover, and soil temperature data as a case study to demonstrate the utility of the SOPWA Project's study design, showing that traditional and industrial approaches to oil palm cultivation lead to declines in canopy cover and ground vegetation cover and increases in soil temperature and soil temperature variability.  These findings are unsurprising and mirror those from similar studies in Southeast Asia (Drescher et al., 2016;  Hardwick et al., 2015) , although absolute values between our study and those in Southeast Asia varied somewhat (for instance, in their rainforest plots,  Drescher et al. (2016) reported about 97.5 % canopy cover and  Hardwick et al. (2015) reported soil temperatures ranging from about 22.8-23.9   • C; in comparison, in our rainforest plots, average canopy cover was lower, at 91.3 %, and soil temperatures were warmer, ranging from 24 to 26 • C).  Our findings show clearly the SOPWA Project's ability to quantify the impacts of oil palm cultivation practises on ecological conditions.  For country palm, cultivation practices include burning small areas of rainforest and planting of crops, which are farmed for one to two years before allowing the areas to regenerate (although regeneration may be only partial, depending on when the area is farmed again).  For industrial oil palm, cultivation practices involve cuttingdown rainforest and planting oil palm monocultures, which are harvested for an approximately twenty-five-year commercial cycle and managed intensively with chemical inputs and industrial machinery (Ashton-Butt et al., 2018;  Global Forest Watch, 2014;  Luke et al., 2019  Luke et al., , 2020)) .   It is likely that the changes in structural complexity (canopy cover, ground vegetation cover) and microclimate (soil temperature and soil temperature variability) are indicative of larger impacts of cultivation on biodiversity and ecosystem functioning (Barnes et al., 2014;  Drescher et al., 2016) , and we will investigate this in future SOPWA Project work.   To date, the SOPWA Project has also surveyed vegetation structural complexity; the biodiversity of trees, understory plants, birds, bats, ground-dwelling mammals, spiders, and insects; and levels of ecosystem functioning including seed removal, ant scavenging activity, forest regeneration, and soil invertebrate feeding activity.  We have specifically chosen these conditions and taxa because they also feature in seminal studies (e.g., Drescher et al., 2016;  Ewers et al., 2011) that have investigated the ecological impacts of oil palm cultivation in Southeast Asia, and therefore provide a focus to compare the relative environmental impacts of palm oil production across native (i.e., Africa) and non-native (i.e., Southeast Asia and Latin America) regions.   Further, they are aspects of the ecosystem that are likely to impact ecosystem services that influence the productivity and profitability of oil palm systems.  In addition to our ecological surveys, the SOPWA Project is also assessing the impacts of cultivation on sociocultural factors.  For instance, we have conducted ethnobotanical surveys with local plant specialists to understand the social, cultural, medicinal, spiritual, and economic value of understory plant species to local communities. 

 Third, whilst most oil palm-focussed research worldwide is concerned with industrial andto a lesser extentsmallholder approaches to cultivation (Reiss-Woolever et al., 2021) , the SOPWA Project is providing first insights into traditional "country palm" cultivation.   This approach to oil palm cultivation is commonly practised across oil palm's native range, but the ecological value of the country palm system has not been quantified.  Our case study on canopy cover, ground vegetation cover, and soil temperature data indicated that country palm systems sit somewhere in between forest and industrial oil palm systems, in terms of their ecological value.  For instance, we found that soil temperatures in industrial oil palm were consistently hotter than in rainforest, regardless of time of day.  In comparison, soil temperatures in country palm and rainforest differed only during the day and, at the middle of the day, temperatures in country palm were cooler than in industrial oil palm.  These findingsand those from understory management experiments in oil palm plantations in Southeast Asia (Luke et al., 2020) indicate that the middle of the day is when habitat changes have the greatest impact on ecosystems through influences in microclimate.   With ever-increasing temperatures owing to climate changes, these cooler systems could provide greater conservation benefits to species with poor buffering abilities.  Further production-focussed studies are needed to assess the relative ecological value of country palm and industrial oil palm systems, accounting for the volume of palm oil that each system produces to identify the best approaches that balance ecological impact and yield (Stichnothe and Schuchardt, 2011) .  

 Importantly, the SOPWA Project demonstrates that large-scale, field-based studies in remote areas of the tropics are possible, especially when grounded in collaboration (Luke et al., 2020) .   Our new programme is a full collaboration between international academics and palm oil industry partners Golden Veroleum Liberia, with project support provided by local communities in the study area and the Government of Liberia's Forestry Development Authority.  Our collaborative relationships are setup such that research progress and interpretation of findings is free from influence, and findings will be fed-back to all project partners to encourage changes in land management and policymaking in both topdown and bottom-up directions, ultimately ensuring the development of approaches that more fully take sustainability into account. 



 Conclusions and future directions for research Our systematic mapping exercise demonstrated that oil palm-based research in Africa is increasing, but that several key research gaps remain that need to be addressed.  Our new research programme in Liberia-the SOPWA Project-was conceived to help to address some of these gaps, including shedding light on the relative ecological impacts of traditional and industrial approaches to oil palm cultivation.  Our case study on canopy cover, ground vegetation cover, and soil temperature data indicated that West African rainforests are ecologically distinct from oil palm systems, but also that traditional and industrial oil palm systems can be ecologically complex and have differing ecological impacts.  Over time, we will publish multi-taxa and sociocultural findings, to more fully quantify the impacts of these alternative cultivation practices and their potential effects on a wider range of ecosystem services.  We hope that by highlighting the SOPWA Project approach and study design, we will encourage future similar projects in the West Africa region and more collaborations within the SOPWA Project itself. 

 This paper is a foundation for forthcoming SOPWA Project research.  The utility of our study design is that-now that our monitoring plots are established-almost any aspect of the ecosystem can be studied within them.  We encourage researchers who would like to collaborate to get in touch, to advance our goal of making tropical agricultural development on the African continent more sustainable. 



 Declaration of competing interest Co-authors with a Forestry Development Authority (FDA), Golden Veroleum Liberia (GVL), and Sinar Mas Agro Resources and Technology Research Institute (SMARTRI) affiliation were employed by their respective institutes while research was conducted.  University of Cambridge retains all intellectual property rights and data-use for all researchers involved in this study.  This research is therefore a collaboration between all affiliated parties. 



 Fig. 1 . 1  Fig. 1.  Coding used to classify publications according to their study scope (Parent categories: interventions, comparisons, and context) and outcome (Parent categories: environmental conditions, production, and social dynamics).  The categories in orange ('codes') were used for final classification and analysis.  Definitions for parent categories and codes are provided in Supplementary Tables1 and 2. Full details of our systematic mapping methodology are provided in Supplementary Text 1. OP = oil palm. 



     Fig. 2 . 2  Fig. 2. Map of the SOPWA Project study area in Sinoe County, Liberia, which features study plots (50 × 50 m) in forest (N = 18; purple squares), country palm (N = 18; orange squares), and industrial oil palm ('Industrial OP' in legend, N = 18; red squares) systems.  Plots are spatially clustered in and around each of six industrial oil palm farms: Tarjuowon-North (purple), Tarjuowon-South (turquoise), Butaw (pink), Kpayan (blue), Tartweh (yellow), and Kabada (peach).  The city of Greenville (pink hexagon), the capital of Sinoe County, is shown as a reference.  Blue and brown lines indicate major rivers and roads, respectively. 



     Fig. 3 . 3  Fig. 3. (A) Number of publications meeting our inclusion criteria over time and (B) the countries in which publications occurred.  In (A), all 757 publications meeting our inclusion criteria are represented, and bar charts indicate the number of studies published each year (range: 1942-2023).  In (B), we removed publications that occurred across Africa generally or occurred outside Africa but met our inclusion criteria (e.g., studies in Malaysia that used oil palm germplasms from Senegal).  658 publications are represented.  Bar charts indicate the number of publications occurring in each country, and diamonds indicate the amount of palm oil produced per country (expressed per 10,000 t and using FAO data from 2019 (FAOSTAT, 2023).  Countries are ordered by palm oil production (highest to lowest).  Countries without bar charts or diamonds indicate those where no publications occurred or that do not produce palm oil (according to the FAO), respectively.  CAR = Central Africa Republic; DRC = Democratic Republic of the Congo; Eq.  Guinea = Equatorial Guinea; Rep. Congo = Republic of the Congo; STP = São Tomé and Príncipe. 



     Fig. 4 . 4  Fig. 4. (A) Study scopes and (B) outcomesand their respective occurrencesacross studies.  Individual publications can appear in more than one code in (A) and (B), as publications often focussed on multiple interventions, comparisons, contexts, and outcomes.  Alternations in background colour between grey and white are to aid visualisation.  Codes are organised according to the groups outlined in Fig. 1 and are defined in Supplementary Tables1 and 2. 



     Fig. 5 . 5  Fig. 5.  The co-occurrence of study scopes (parent categories: interventions, comparisons, context) and outcomes (parent categories: environmental conditions, production, social dynamics) in the 757 publications.  Darker cells have higher co-occurrence frequencies.  An individual publication can fall into multiple cells.  Codes are organised according to Fig. 1 and are defined in Supplementary Tables1 and 2. 



     Fig. 6 . 6  Fig. 6.  Differences in (A) canopy cover, (B) ground vegetation cover, and (C) soil temperature across forest, country palm, and industrial oil palm systems.  For (A) and (B), boxplots display median and interquartile ranges, and per-plot values are shown as circles.  For (C), lines represent outputs from the GAMM (with 95 % confidence intervals).  We did not plot raw temperature data to aid visualisation, as data were collected at hourly intervals (N = 2496). 



       review & editing, Data curation.  Peter Hadfield: Writingreview & editing, Conceptualization.  Morris T. Jah: Writingreview & editing, Data curation.  Tiecanna Jones: Data curation, Conceptualization, Project administration.  Samuel Kandie: Data curation.  Daniel Koffa: Data curation.  Judith Korb: Writingreview & editing.  Nehemiah Koon: Data curation.  Benedict Manewah: Writingreview & editing, Project administration, Methodology, Conceptualization, Data curation.  Lourdes M. Medrano: Data curation, Writing -review & editing.  Ana F. Palmeirim: Writingreview & editing, Conceptualization.  Brogan Pett: Writingreview & editing.  Ricardo Rocha: Writingreview & editing, Conceptualization.  Evangeline Swope-Nyantee: Writingreview & editing, Project administration.  Jimmy Tue: Data curation.  Josiah Tuolee: Data curation.  Pieter Van Dessel: Writingreview & editing, Conceptualization.  Abraham Vincent: Writingreview & editing, Data curation.  Romeo Weah: Writingreview & editing, Data curation.  Rudy Widodo: Writingreview & editing, Project administration.  Alfred J. Yennego: Writingreview & editing, Project administration.  Jerry Yonmah: Writingreview & editing, Project administration.  Edgar C. Turner: Writingreview & editing, Resources, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Data curation, Conceptualization. 



   Acknowledgements M.D.P. thanks and acknowledges funding from the Marshall Aid Commemoration Commission (MACC) ,  BBSRC  Impact Acceleration Account (  BB/S506710/1 ),  St Edmund's College, Cambridge ,  Varley Gradwell Travelling Fellowship in Insect Ecology (University of Oxford ),  Johanna Darlington Trust Fund,  Cambridge Philosophical Society , and from  Jesus College Oxford (through R.R.).M.D.P and B.F. thank and acknowledge funding from the  Cambridge-Africa ALBORADA Research Fund .C.A.M.M. thanks and acknowledges funding from  King's College Cambridge .A.F.P. received financial support from the  European Union 's  Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the grant agreement No.  854248 (TROPIBIO) and from  Jesus College Oxford (through R.R.).Collaborations between M.D.P., B.F., E.C.T., and J.D. were supported by a  NERC  Environmental Sciences Global Partnerships Seedcorn Fund Award (  NE/Y003136/1 ), and J.D. received further funding from the  NERC National  Capability Science: International Award "Options for Net Zero Plus  and Climate Change Adaptation " (  NE/ X006247/1 ).M.T.H. was funded by  NERC C-CLEAR Research Experience Placement (REP) funding while working on this project.We thank the  Government of Liberia , and especially the  Forestry Development Authority , for granting permission for our survey work (M.D.P. research permits: Republic of Liberia Business Visas #420 (2022) and #1869 (2023); J.H.T. research permit: Republic of  Liberia Business Visa #1868).We thank  William Foster for helpful conversations as we developed the manuscript. 





 BB/S506710/1  Impact Acceleration Account   854248  Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme   NE/Y003136/1  Environmental Sciences Global Partnerships Seedcorn Fund Award   NE/ X006247/1  and Climate Change Adaptation  Capability Science: International Award "Options for Net Zero Plus    Data availability Data are available on the University of Cambridge Online Digital Repository: https://doi.org/10.17863/CAM.107163. 





 Ethical approval Ethical approval for interviews with farmers (Supplementary Table 4 ) was obtained from the Cambridge Psychology Research Ethics Committee (Application number: PRE.2020.004).   Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.  org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2024.171850. 



 CRediT authorship contribution 

 Occurrence, distribution, and farmers' knowledge on the management of fusarium wilt of oil palm among smallholders in Kalangala, Uganda  O  M  Amugoli    G  Ddamulira    A  Asiimwe    K  Joseph    G  Ddumba    E  Mutyaba    I  Ramathani    10.21894/jopr.2020.0045     Journal of Oil Palm Research  32  3    2020    Amugoli, O.M., Ddamulira, G., Asiimwe, A., Joseph, K., Ddumba, G., Mutyaba, E., Ramathani, I., 2020. Occurrence, distribution, and farmers' knowledge on the management of fusarium wilt of oil palm among smallholders in Kalangala, Uganda. Journal of Oil Palm Research 32 (3), 488-496. https://doi.org/10.21894/ jopr.2020.0045.   Understory vegetation in oil palm plantations benefits soil biodiversity and decomposition rates  A  Ashton-Butt    A  A K  Aryawan    A  S C  Hood    M  Naim    D  Purnomo    Suhardi    R  Wahyuningsih    S  Willcock    G  M  Poppy    J.-P  Caliman    E  C  Turner    W  A  Foster    K  S  Peh    -H  Snaddon    J  L    10.3389/ffgc.2018.00010     Frontiers in Forests and Global Change  1    2018. December    Ashton-Butt, A., Aryawan, A.A.K., Hood, A.S.C., Naim, M., Purnomo, D., Suhardi, Wahyuningsih, R., Willcock, S., Poppy, G.M., Caliman, J.-P., Turner, E.C., Foster, W. A., Peh, K.S.-H., Snaddon, J.L., 2018. Understory vegetation in oil palm plantations benefits soil biodiversity and decomposition rates. Frontiers in Forests and Global Change 1 (December), 1-13. https://doi.org/10.3389/ffgc.2018.00010.   Distribution and incidence of the oil palm weevil Rhynchophorus phoenicis (Fabricius, 1801) (Coleoptera: Curculionidae) in selected agro-ecological zones of Uganda  J  Baguma    M  Otema    G  Ddamulira    R  Naluyimba    J  P  Egonyu    10.4001/003.027.0477     African Entomology  27  2  477  2019    Baguma, J., Otema, M., Ddamulira, G., Naluyimba, R., Egonyu, J.P., 2019. Distribution and incidence of the oil palm weevil Rhynchophorus phoenicis (Fabricius, 1801) (Coleoptera: Curculionidae) in selected agro-ecological zones of Uganda. African Entomology 27 (2), 477. https://doi.org/10.4001/003.027.0477.   Consequences of tropical land use for multitrophic biodiversity and ecosystem functioning  A  D  Barnes    M  Jochum    S  Mumme    N  F  Haneda    A  Farajallah    T  H  Widarto    U  Brose    10.1038/ncomms6351     Nature. Communications  5  2014. 5351    Barnes, A.D., Jochum, M., Mumme, S., Haneda, N.F., Farajallah, A., Widarto, T.H., Brose, U., 2014. Consequences of tropical land use for multitrophic biodiversity and ecosystem functioning. Nature. Communications 5 (5351). https://doi.org/10.1038/ ncomms6351.   Yellow is good for you': consumer perception and acceptability of fortified and biofortified cassava products  A  Bechoff    U  Chijioke    A  Westby    K  I  Tomlins    10.1371/journal.pone.0203421     PloS One  13  9  203421  2018    Bechoff, A., Chijioke, U., Westby, A., Tomlins, K.I., 2018. 'Yellow is good for you': consumer perception and acceptability of fortified and biofortified cassava products. PloS One 13 (9), e0203421. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0203421.   The Forests of Upper Guinea: Gradients in Large Species Composition  F  Bongers    L  Poorter    W  D  Hawthorne     Biodiversity of West African forests  2004  CABI Publishing  UK    Bongers, F., Poorter, L., Hawthorne, W.D., 2004. The Forests of Upper Guinea: Gradients in Large Species Composition. CABI Publishing, UK, In Biodiversity of West African forests.   Do voluntary certification standards improve yields and wellbeing? Evidence from oil palm and cocoa smallholders in Ghana  D  E  Brako    A  Richard    G  Alexandros    10.1080/14735903.2020.1807893     Int. J. Agric. Sustain  19  1    2021    Brako, D.E., Richard, A., Alexandros, G., 2021. Do voluntary certification standards improve yields and wellbeing? Evidence from oil palm and cocoa smallholders in Ghana. Int. J. Agric. Sustain. 19 (1), 16-39. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 14735903.2020.1807893.   Minimal spillover of native small mammals from Bornean tropical forests into adjacent oil palm plantations  P  M  Chapman    R  Loveridge    J  M  Rowcliffe    C  Carbone    H  Bernard    C  W  Davison    R  M  Ewers    10.3389/ffgc.2019.00002     Front. For. Glob. Change  2    2019. March    Chapman, P.M., Loveridge, R., Rowcliffe, J.M., Carbone, C., Bernard, H., Davison, C.W., Ewers, R.M., 2019. Minimal spillover of native small mammals from Bornean tropical forests into adjacent oil palm plantations. Front. For. Glob. Change 2 (March), 1-12. https://doi.org/10.3389/ffgc.2019.00002.   R  Corley    P  Tinker    The Oil Palm, Fifth edition  R  Corley    P  Tinker    John Wiley & Sons  2016    Corley, R., Tinker, P., 2016. In: Corley, R., Tinker, P. (Eds.), The Oil Palm, Fifth edition. John Wiley & Sons.   Classifying drivers of global forest loss  P  G  Curtis    C  M  Slay    N  L  Harris    A  Tyukavina    M  C  Hansen    10.1126/science.aau3445     Science  361  6407    2018    Curtis, P.G., Slay, C.M., Harris, N.L., Tyukavina, A., Hansen, M.C., 2018. Classifying drivers of global forest loss. Science 361 (6407), 1108-1111. https://doi.org/ 10.1126/science.aau3445.     The organisation for economic co-operation and development  DAC List of ODA Recipients  2023    DAC List of ODA Recipients, 2023. The organisation for economic co-operation and development. Accessed at: https://www.oecd.org/dac/financing-sustainable-develo pment/development-finance-standards/DAC-List-of-ODA-Recipients-for-reporting- 2022-23-flows.pdf.   Tropical forest loss enhanced by large-scale land acquisitions  K  F  Davis    H  I  Koo    J  Dell'angelo    P  D'odorico    L  Estes    L  J  Kehoe    M  Kharratzadeh    T  Kuemmerle    D  Machava    A  J R  De Pais    N  Ribeiro    M  C  Rulli    M  Tatlhego    10.1038/s41561-020-0592-3     Nat. Geosci  13  7    2020    Davis, K.F., Koo, H.I., Dell'Angelo, J., D'Odorico, P., Estes, L., Kehoe, L.J., Kharratzadeh, M., Kuemmerle, T., Machava, D., de Pais, A.J.R., Ribeiro, N., Rulli, M. C., Tatlhego, M., 2020. Tropical forest loss enhanced by large-scale land acquisitions. Nat. Geosci. 13 (7), 482-488. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41561-020-0592-3.   Biodiversity and land-use change: understanding the complex responses of an endemic-rich bird assemblage  R  F  De Lima    M  Dallimer    P  W  Atkinson    J  Barlow    10.1111/ddi.12015     Divers. Distrib  19  4    2013    De Lima, R.F., Dallimer, M., Atkinson, P.W., Barlow, J., 2013. Biodiversity and land-use change: understanding the complex responses of an endemic-rich bird assemblage. Divers. Distrib. 19 (4), 411-422. https://doi.org/10.1111/ddi.12015.   Highresolution global map of smallholder and industrial closed-canopy oil palm plantations  A  Descals    S  Wich    E  Meijaard    D  L A  Gaveau    S  Peedell    Z  Szantoi    10.5194/essd-13-1211-2021     Earth Syst. Sci. Data  13  3    2021    Descals, A., Wich, S., Meijaard, E., Gaveau, D.L.A., Peedell, S., Szantoi, Z., 2021. High- resolution global map of smallholder and industrial closed-canopy oil palm plantations. Earth Syst. Sci. Data 13 (3), 1211-1231. https://doi.org/10.5194/essd- 13-1211-2021.   A review of the ecosystem functions in oil palm plantations, using forests as a reference system  C  Dislich    A  C  Keyel    J  Salecker    Y  Kisel    K  M  Meyer    M  Auliya    A  D  Barnes    M  D  Corre    K  Darras    H  Faust    B  Hess    S  Klasen    A  Knohl    H  Kreft    A  Meijide    F  Nurdiansyah    F  Otten    G  Pe'er    S  Steinebach    K  Wiegand    10.1111/brv.12295     Biol. Rev  92  3    2017    Dislich, C., Keyel, A.C., Salecker, J., Kisel, Y., Meyer, K.M., Auliya, M., Barnes, A.D., Corre, M.D., Darras, K., Faust, H., Hess, B., Klasen, S., Knohl, A., Kreft, H., Meijide, A., Nurdiansyah, F., Otten, F., Pe'er, G., Steinebach, S., … Wiegand, K., 2017. A review of the ecosystem functions in oil palm plantations, using forests as a reference system. Biol. Rev. 92 (3), 1539-1569. https://doi.org/10.1111/brv.12295.   Sustainable but hungry? Food security outcomes of certification for cocoa and oil palm smallholders in Ghana  E  B  Dompreh    R  Asare    A  Gasparatos    10.1088/1748-9326/abdf88     Environ. Res. Lett  16  5  55001  2021    Dompreh, E.B., Asare, R., Gasparatos, A., 2021. Sustainable but hungry? Food security outcomes of certification for cocoa and oil palm smallholders in Ghana. Environ. Res. Lett. 16 (5), 055001 https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/abdf88.   Ecological and socio-economic functions across tropical land use systems after rainforest conversion  J  Drescher    K  Rembold    K  Allen    P  Beckschäfer    D  Buchori    Y  Clough    H  Faust    A  M  Fauzi    D  Gunawan    D  Hertel    B  Irawan    I  N S  Jaya    B  Klarner    C  Kleinn    A  Knohl    M  M  Kotowska    V  Krashevska    V  Krishna    C  Leuschner    S  Scheu    10.1098/rstb.2015.0275     Philos. Trans. R. Soc., B  371    2016. 1694    Drescher, J., Rembold, K., Allen, K., Beckschäfer, P., Buchori, D., Clough, Y., Faust, H., Fauzi, A.M., Gunawan, D., Hertel, D., Irawan, B., Jaya, I.N.S., Klarner, B., Kleinn, C., Knohl, A., Kotowska, M.M., Krashevska, V., Krishna, V., Leuschner, C., Scheu, S., 2016. Ecological and socio-economic functions across tropical land use systems after rainforest conversion. Philos. Trans. R. Soc., B 371 (1694), 1-8. https://doi.org/ 10.1098/rstb.2015.0275.   Comparison of greenhouse gas fluxes from tropical forests and oil palm plantations on mineral soil  J  Drewer    M  M  Leduning    R  I  Griffiths    T  Goodall    P  E  Levy    N  Cowan    E  Comynn-Platt    G  Hayman    J  Sentian    N  Majalap    U  M  Skiba    10.5194/bg-18-1559-2021     Biogeosciences  18  5    2021    Drewer, J., Leduning, M.M., Griffiths, R.I., Goodall, T., Levy, P.E., Cowan, N., Comynn- Platt, E., Hayman, G., Sentian, J., Majalap, N., Skiba, U.M., 2021. Comparison of greenhouse gas fluxes from tropical forests and oil palm plantations on mineral soil. Biogeosciences 18 (5), 1559-1575. https://doi.org/10.5194/bg-18-1559-2021.   Insect flowervisitors of African oil palm Elaeis guineensis at different sites and distances from natural vegetation in Uganda  J  P  Egonyu    S  E  Sisye    J  Baguma    M  Otema    G  Ddamulira    10.1007/s42690-021-00426-6     Int. J. Trop. Insect. Sci  41  4    2021    Egonyu, J.P., Sisye, S.E., Baguma, J., Otema, M., Ddamulira, G., 2021. Insect flower- visitors of African oil palm Elaeis guineensis at different sites and distances from natural vegetation in Uganda. Int. J. Trop. Insect. Sci. 41 (4), 2477-2487. https:// doi.org/10.1007/s42690-021-00426-6.   A large-scale forest fragmentation experiment: the stability of altered Forest ecosystems project  R  M  Ewers    R  K  Didham    L  Fahrig    G  Ferraz    A  Hector    R  D  Holt    V  Kapos    G  Reynolds    W  Sinun    J  L  Snaddon    E  C  Turner    10.1098/rstb.2011.0049     Philos. Trans. R. Soc., B, Biol. Sci  366    2011. 1582. 2023    Ewers, R.M., Didham, R.K., Fahrig, L., Ferraz, G., Hector, A., Holt, R.D., Kapos, V., Reynolds, G., Sinun, W., Snaddon, J.L., Turner, E.C., 2011. A large-scale forest fragmentation experiment: the stability of altered Forest ecosystems project. Philos. Trans. R. Soc., B, Biol. Sci. 366 (1582), 3292-3302. https://doi.org/10.1098/ rstb.2011.0049. FAOSTAT, 2023. The United Nations. Accessed at: https://www.fao.org/statistics/en/.   Implications of zero-deforestation palm oil for tropical grassy and dry forest biodiversity  S  Fleiss    C  L  Parr    P  J  Platts    C  J  Mcclean    R  M  Beyer    H  King    J  M  Lucey    J  K  Hill    10.1038/s41559-022-01941-6     Nat. Ecol. Evol  2022    Fleiss, S., Parr, C.L., Platts, P.J., McClean, C.J., Beyer, R.M., King, H., Lucey, J.M., Hill, J. K., 2022. Implications of zero-deforestation palm oil for tropical grassy and dry forest biodiversity. Nat. Ecol. Evol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-022-01941-6.   Liberia: National Forest Inventory    2019. 2018. 2019  Forestry Development Authority    Forestry Development Authority, 2019. Liberia: National Forest Inventory 2018/2019. Accessed at: https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/system/files/documents/ Liberia%20National%20Forest%20Inventory.pdf.   Establishing the evidence base for maintaining biodiversity and ecosystem function in the oil palm landscapes of South East Asia  W  A  Foster    J  L  Snaddon    E  C  Turner    T  M  Fayle    T  D  Cockerill    M  D F  Ellwood    G  R  Broad    A  Y C  Chung    P  Eggleton    C  V  Khen    K  M  Yusah    10.1098/rstb.2011.0041     Philos. Trans. R. Soc., B, Biol. Sci  366    2011. 1582    Foster, W.A., Snaddon, J.L., Turner, E.C., Fayle, T.M., Cockerill, T.D., Ellwood, M.D.F., Broad, G.R., Chung, A.Y.C., Eggleton, P., Khen, C.V., Yusah, K.M., 2011. Establishing the evidence base for maintaining biodiversity and ecosystem function in the oil palm landscapes of South East Asia. Philos. Trans. R. Soc., B, Biol. Sci. 366 (1582), 3277-3291. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2011.0041.   Home gardens: A promising approach to enhance household food security and wellbeing  D  H  Galhena    R  Freed    K  M  Maredia    10.1186/2048-7010-2-8     Agric. Food Secur  2  1  8  2013    Galhena, D.H., Freed, R., Maredia, K.M., 2013. Home gardens: A promising approach to enhance household food security and wellbeing. Agric. Food Secur. 2 (1), 8. https:// doi.org/10.1186/2048-7010-2-8.     Concession Agreement Between Golden Veroleum Liberia and the Government of the Republic of Liberia  Government of Liberia  2010    Government of Liberia, 2010. Concession Agreement Between Golden Veroleum Liberia and the Government of the Republic of Liberia. Accessed at: https://goldenverol eumliberia.com/wp-content/uploads/2010/09/2014-09-30.2_GVL_Concession_ Agreement-rev1.pdf.   The relationship between leaf area index and microclimate in tropical forest and oil palm plantation: Forest disturbance drives changes in microclimate  S  R  Hardwick    R  Toumi    M  Pfeifer    E  C  Turner    R  Nilus    R  M  Ewers    10.1016/j.agrformet.2014.11.010     Agric. For. Meteorol  201    2015    Hardwick, S.R., Toumi, R., Pfeifer, M., Turner, E.C., Nilus, R., Ewers, R.M., 2015. The relationship between leaf area index and microclimate in tropical forest and oil palm plantation: Forest disturbance drives changes in microclimate. Agric. For. Meteorol. 201, 187-195. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agrformet.2014.11.010.   F  Hartig    L  Lohse      DHARMa: residual diagnostics for hierarchical (multi-level/ mixed) regression models  2022    Hartig, F., Lohse, L., 2022. DHARMa: residual diagnostics for hierarchical (multi-level/ mixed) regression models. Accessed at: https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/ DHARMa/index.html.   multcomp: Simultaneous Inference in General Parametric Models  T  Hothorn    F  Bretz    P  Westfall    R  M  Heiberger    A  Schuetzenmeister    S  Scheibe      2023    Hothorn, T., Bretz, F., Westfall, P., Heiberger, R.M., Schuetzenmeister, A., Scheibe, S., 2023. multcomp: Simultaneous Inference in General Parametric Models. Accessed at: https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/multcomp/index.html.   A methodology for systematic mapping in environmental sciences  K  L  James    N  P  Randall    N  R  Haddaway    10.1186/s13750-016-0059-6     Environ. Evid  5  1  7  2016    James, K.L., Randall, N.P., Haddaway, N.R., 2016. A methodology for systematic mapping in environmental sciences. Environ. Evid. 5 (1), 7. https://doi.org/ 10.1186/s13750-016-0059-6.   Diversification, intensification and specialization: changing land use in Western Africa from 1800 BC to AD 1500  A  U  Kay    D  Q  Fuller    K  Neumann    B  Eichhorn    A  Höhn    J  Morin-Rivat    L  Champion    V  Linseele    E  Huysecom    S  Ozainne    L  Lespez    S  Biagetti    M  Madella    U  Salzmann    J  O  Kaplan    10.1007/s10963-019-09131-2     J. World Prehist  32  2    2019    Kay, A.U., Fuller, D.Q., Neumann, K., Eichhorn, B., Höhn, A., Morin-Rivat, J., Champion, L., Linseele, V., Huysecom, E., Ozainne, S., Lespez, L., Biagetti, S., Madella, M., Salzmann, U., Kaplan, J.O., 2019. Diversification, intensification and specialization: changing land use in Western Africa from 1800 BC to AD 1500. J. World Prehist. 32 (2), 179-228. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10963-019-09131-2.   R  Kolde      Package 'pheatmap: Pretty Heatmaps  2022    Kolde, R., 2022. Package 'pheatmap: Pretty Heatmaps. Accessed at: https://cran.r-proje ct.org/web/packages/pheatmap/index.html.   Modelling photosynthesis and stomatal response of oil palm clones to environmental conditions in North Sumatra (Indonesia). Implication for plant breeding  E  Lamade    F  Bonnot    Z  Poeloengan     Proceedings of the 1996 PORIM international palm oil congress : competitiveness for the 21st century  the 1996 PORIM international palm oil congress : competitiveness for the 21st century  1996      Lamade, E., Bonnot, F., POeloengan, Z., 1996. Modelling photosynthesis and stomatal response of oil palm clones to environmental conditions in North Sumatra (Indonesia). Implication for plant breeding. In: Proceedings of the 1996 PORIM international palm oil congress : competitiveness for the 21st century, pp. 87-96.   Spillover of insects from rain forest into adjacent oil palm plantations  J  M  Lucey    J  K  Hill    10.1111/j.1744-7429.2011.00824.x     Biotropica  44  3    2012    Lucey, J.M., Hill, J.K., 2012. Spillover of insects from rain forest into adjacent oil palm plantations. Biotropica 44 (3), 368-377. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744- 7429.2011.00824.x.   Effects of understory vegetation management on plant communities in oil palm plantations in Sumatra, Indonesia  S  H  Luke    D  Purnomo    A  D  Advento    A  A K  Aryawan    M  Naim    R  N  Pikstein    S  Ps    T  D S  Rambe    Soeprapto    J.-P  Caliman    J  L  Snaddon    W  A  Foster    E  C  Turner    10.3389/ffgc.2019.00033     Frontiers in Forests and Global Change  2019. July    Luke, S.H., Purnomo, D., Advento, A.D., Aryawan, A.A.K., Naim, M., Pikstein, R.N., Ps, S., Rambe, T.D.S., Soeprapto, Caliman, J.-P., Snaddon, J.L., Foster, W.A., Turner, E.C., 2019. Effects of understory vegetation management on plant communities in oil palm plantations in Sumatra, Indonesia. Frontiers in Forests and Global Change. https://doi.org/10.3389/ffgc.2019.00033, 2(July).   Managing oil palm plantations more sustainably: large-scale experiments within the biodiversity and ecosystem function in tropical agriculture (BEFTA) Programme  S  H  Luke    A  D  Advento    A  A K  Aryawan    D  N  Adhy    A  Ashton-Butt    H  Barclay    J  P  Dewi    J  Drewer    A  J  Dumbrell    Edi    A  E  Eycott    M  F  Harianja    J  K  Hinsch    A  S C  Hood    C  Kurniawan    D  J  Kurz    D  J  Mann    K  J  Matthews Nicholass    M  Naim    E  C  Turner    10.3389/ffgc.2019.00075     Front. For. Glob. Change  2    2020. January    Luke, S.H., Advento, A.D., Aryawan, A.A.K., Adhy, D.N., Ashton-Butt, A., Barclay, H., Dewi, J.P., Drewer, J., Dumbrell, A.J., Edi, Eycott, A. E., Harianja, M. F., Hinsch, J. K., Hood, A. S. C., Kurniawan, C., Kurz, D. J., Mann, D. J., Matthews Nicholass, K. J., Naim, M., … Turner, E. C., 2020. Managing oil palm plantations more sustainably: large-scale experiments within the biodiversity and ecosystem function in tropical agriculture (BEFTA) Programme. Front. For. Glob. Change 2 (January), 1-20. https://doi.org/10.3389/ffgc.2019.00075.   glmmTMB: Generalized Linear Mixed Models using Template Model Builder  A  Magnusson    H  Skaug    A  Nielsen    C  Berg    K  Kristensen    M  Maechler    K  Van Bentham    N  Sadat    B  Bolker    M  Brooks      2019    Magnusson, A., Skaug, H., Nielsen, A., Berg, C., Kristensen, K., Maechler, M., van Bentham, K., Sadat, N., Bolker, B., Brooks, M., 2019. glmmTMB: Generalized Linear Mixed Models using Template Model Builder. Accessed at: https://cran.r-project. org/web/packages/glmmTMB/index.html.   Assessment of genetic diversity in oil palm (Elaeis guineensis Jacq.) using restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP)  I  Maizura    N  Rajanaidu    A  H  Zakri    S  C  Cheah    10.1007/s10722-004-4004-0     Genet. Resour. Crop. Evol  53  1    2006    Maizura, I., Rajanaidu, N., Zakri, A.H., Cheah, S.C., 2006. Assessment of genetic diversity in oil palm (Elaeis guineensis Jacq.) using restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP). Genet. Resour. Crop. Evol. 53 (1), 187-195. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s10722-004-4004-0.   Bioquality hotspots in the tropical African Flora  C  A M  Marshall    J  J  Wieringa    W  D  Hawthorne    10.1016/j.cub.2016.09.045     Curr. Biol  26  23    2016    Marshall, C.A.M., Wieringa, J.J., Hawthorne, W.D., 2016. Bioquality hotspots in the tropical African Flora. Curr. Biol. 26 (23), 3214-3219. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. cub.2016.09.045.   An interpolated biogeographical framework for tropical Africa using plant species distributions and the physical environment  C  A M  Marshall    J  J  Wieringa    W  D  Hawthorne    10.1111/jbi.13976     J. Biogeogr  48  1    2021    Marshall, C.A.M., Wieringa, J.J., Hawthorne, W.D., 2021. An interpolated biogeographical framework for tropical Africa using plant species distributions and the physical environment. J. Biogeogr. 48 (1), 23-36. https://doi.org/10.1111/ jbi.13976.   Predictors of plant endemism in two west African forest hotspots  C  A M  Marshall    J  Dabo    M  Mensah    P  Ekpe    J  T  Kpadehyea    O  O  Haba    D  Bilivogui    W  D  Hawthorne    10.3389/fevo.2022.980660     Front. Ecol. Evol  10  980660  2022    Marshall, C.A.M., Dabo, J., Mensah, M., Ekpe, P., Kpadehyea, J.T., Haba, O.O., Bilivogui, D., Hawthorne, W.D., 2022. Predictors of plant endemism in two west African forest hotspots. Front. Ecol. Evol. 10, 980660 https://doi.org/10.3389/ fevo.2022.980660.   The environmental impacts of palm oil in context  E  Meijaard    T  Brooks    K  Carlson    E  Slade    J  G  Ulloa    D  Gaveau    J  S H  Lee    T  Santika    D  Juffe-Bignoli    M  Struebig    S  Wich    M  Ancrenaz    L  P  Koh    N  Zamira    J  F  Abrams    H  Prins    C  Sendashonga    D  Murdiyarso    P  Furumo    D  Sheil    10.31223/osf.io/e69bz     Nature Plants  6    2020. December    Meijaard, E., Brooks, T., Carlson, K., Slade, E., Ulloa, J.G., Gaveau, D., Lee, J.S.H., Santika, T., Juffe-Bignoli, D., Struebig, M., Wich, S., Ancrenaz, M., Koh, L.P., Zamira, N., Abrams, J.F., Prins, H., Sendashonga, C., Murdiyarso, D., Furumo, P., Sheil, D., 2020. The environmental impacts of palm oil in context. Nature Plants 6 (December), 1418-1425. https://doi.org/10.31223/osf.io/e69bz.   Effects of tropical forest conversion into oil palm plantations on nitrous oxide emissions: A meta-analysis  T  Mori    10.1007/s11676-022-01493-2     J. For. Res  34  3    2023    Mori, T., 2023. Effects of tropical forest conversion into oil palm plantations on nitrous oxide emissions: A meta-analysis. J. For. Res. 34 (3), 865-869. https://doi.org/ 10.1007/s11676-022-01493-2.   Biodiversity hotspots for conservation priorities  N  Myers    R  A  Mittermeier    C  G  Mittermeier    G  A B  Da Kent    F  Kent    J     Nature  403    2000    Myers, N., Mittermeier, R.A., Mittermeier, C.G., da Kent, G.A.B., F., & Kent, J., 2000. Biodiversity hotspots for conservation priorities. Nature 403, 853-858.   The impacts of tropical agriculture on biodiversity: A meta-analysis  J  L  Oakley    J  E  Bicknell    10.1111/1365-2664.14303     J. Appl. Ecol  59  12    2022    Oakley, J.L., Bicknell, J.E., 2022. The impacts of tropical agriculture on biodiversity: A meta-analysis. J. Appl. Ecol. 59 (12), 3072-3082. https://doi.org/10.1111/1365- 2664.14303.   Terrestrial ecoregions of the world: A new map of life on earth  D  M  Olson    E  Dinerstein    E  D  Wikramanayake    N  D  Burgess    G  V N  Powell    E  C  Underwood    J  A  Itoua    I  Strand    H  E  Morrison    J  C  Loucks    C  J  Allnutt    T  F  Ricketts    T  H  Kura    Y  Lamoreux    J  F  Wettengel    W  W  Hedao    P  Kassem    K  R    10.1641/0006-3568(2001)051[0933,teotwa]2.0.co;2     BioScience  51  11  933  2001    Olson, D.M., Dinerstein, E., Wikramanayake, E.D., Burgess, N.D., Powell, G.V.N., Underwood, E.C., D'amico, J.A., Itoua, I., Strand, H.E., Morrison, J.C., Loucks, C.J., Allnutt, T.F., Ricketts, T.H., Kura, Y., Lamoreux, J.F., Wettengel, W.W., Hedao, P., Kassem, K.R., 2001. Terrestrial ecoregions of the world: A new map of life on earth. BioScience 51 (11), 933. https://doi.org/10.1641/0006-3568(2001)051[0933, teotwa]2.0.co;   Global sustainability standards and food security: exploring unintended effects of voluntary certification in palm oil  P  Oosterveer    B  E  Adjei    S  Vellema    M  Slingerland    10.1016/j.gfs.2014.09.006     Glob. Food Sec  3  3-4    2014    Oosterveer, P., Adjei, B.E., Vellema, S., Slingerland, M., 2014. Global sustainability standards and food security: exploring unintended effects of voluntary certification in palm oil. Glob. Food Sec. 3 (3-4), 220-226. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. gfs.2014.09.006.   Deforestation risk due to commodity crop expansion in sub-Saharan Africa  E  M  Ordway    G  P  Asner    E  F  Lambin    10.1088/1748-9326/aa6509     Environ. Res. Lett  12  4  44015  2017    Ordway, E.M., Asner, G.P., Lambin, E.F., 2017. Deforestation risk due to commodity crop expansion in sub-Saharan Africa. Environ. Res. Lett. 12 (4), 044015 https://doi.org/ 10.1088/1748-9326/aa6509.   A systematic map of within-plantation oil palm management practices reveals a rapidly growing but patchy evidence base  M  Popkin    V  J  Reiss-Woolever    E  C  Turner    S  H  Luke    10.1371/journal.pstr.0000023     PLOS Sustain. Transform  1  7  23  2022    Popkin, M., Reiss-Woolever, V.J., Turner, E.C., Luke, S.H., 2022. A systematic map of within-plantation oil palm management practices reveals a rapidly growing but patchy evidence base. PLOS Sustain. Transform 1 (7), e0000023. https://doi.org/ 10.1371/journal.pstr.0000023.   R: A language and environment for statistical computing  Team  Core    2023    R Core Team, 2023. R: A language and environment for statistical computing.   Trends in global agricultural land use: implications for environmental health and food security  N  Ramankutty    Z  Mehrabi    K  Waha    L  Jarvis    C  Kremen    M  Herrero    L  H  Rieseberg    10.1146/annurev-arplant-042817-040256     Annu. Rev. Plant Biol  69  1    2018    Ramankutty, N., Mehrabi, Z., Waha, K., Jarvis, L., Kremen, C., Herrero, M., Rieseberg, L. H., 2018. Trends in global agricultural land use: implications for environmental health and food security. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 69 (1), 789-815. https://doi.org/ 10.1146/annurev-arplant-042817-040256.   Systematic mapping shows the need for increased socio-ecological research on oil palm  V  J  Reiss-Woolever    S  H  Luke    J  Stone    G  E  Shackelford    E  C  Turner    10.1088/1748-9326/abfc77     Environ. Res. Lett  16  6    2021    Reiss-Woolever, V.J., Luke, S.H., Stone, J., Shackelford, G.E., Turner, E.C., 2021. Systematic mapping shows the need for increased socio-ecological research on oil palm. Environ. Res. Lett. 16 (6), 1-19. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/abfc77.   Climate, soil and land-use based land suitability evaluation for oil palm production in Ghana  T  Rhebergen    T  Fairhurst    S  Zingore    M  Fisher    T  Oberthür    A  Whitbread    10.1016/j.eja.2016.08.004     Eur. J. Agron  81    2016    Rhebergen, T., Fairhurst, T., Zingore, S., Fisher, M., Oberthür, T., Whitbread, A., 2016. Climate, soil and land-use based land suitability evaluation for oil palm production in Ghana. Eur. J. Agron. 81, 1-14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2016.08.004.   H  Ritchie    M  Roser      Forests and Deforestation  2021    Our World in Data  Ritchie, H., Roser, M., 2021. Forests and Deforestation. In: Our World in Data. Accessed at: https://ourworldindata.org/forests-and-deforestation.   RSPO Impact Report  2016. 2016    Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil  RSPO Impact Report, 2016. 2016 (Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil).   RStudio: Integrated Development for R. RStudio  RStudio Team     2023  PBC  Boston, MA    RStudio Team, 2023. RStudio: Integrated Development for R. RStudio, PBC, Boston, MA Accessed at: http://www.rstudio.com/.   Impact of palm oil sustainability certification on village well-being and poverty in Indonesia  T  Santika    K  A  Wilson    E  A  Law    F  A V  St John    K  M  Carlson    H  Gibbs    C  L  Morgans    M  Ancrenaz    E  Meijaard    M  J  Struebig    10.1038/s41893-020-00630-1     Nature Sustainability  2020    Santika, T., Wilson, K.A., Law, E.A., St John, F.A.V., Carlson, K.M., Gibbs, H., Morgans, C. L., Ancrenaz, M., Meijaard, E., Struebig, M.J., 2020. Impact of palm oil sustainability certification on village well-being and poverty in Indonesia. Nature Sustainability. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-020-00630-1.   The government of Liberia     Sinoe County Development Agenda  2012    Sinoe County Development Agenda, 2012. The government of Liberia. Accessed at: htt ps://www.mia.gov.lr/1content.php?sub=195&related=40&third=195&pg=sp.   Global land change from 1982 to 2016  X  P  Song    M  C  Hansen    S  V  Stehman    P  V  Potapov    A  Tyukavina    E  F  Vermote    J  R  Townshend    10.1038/s41586-018-0411-9     Nature  560  7720    2018    Song, X.P., Hansen, M.C., Stehman, S.V., Potapov, P.V., Tyukavina, A., Vermote, E.F., Townshend, J.R., 2018. Global land change from 1982 to 2016. Nature 560 (7720), 639-643. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0411-9.   The significance of the oil palm (Elaeis guineensis Jacq.) in the late Holocene environments of west and west Central Africa: A further consideration  M  A  Sowunmi    10.1007/BF02342720     Veg. Hist. Archaeobotany  8  3    1999    Sowunmi, M.A., 1999. The significance of the oil palm (Elaeis guineensis Jacq.) in the late Holocene environments of west and west Central Africa: A further consideration. Veg. Hist. Archaeobotany 8 (3), 199-210. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02342720.      Statistik Perkebunan Unggulan Nasional  Secretariate of Directorate General of Estate Crops  Ministry of Agriculture  2019--2021. 2021    Statistik Perkebunan Unggulan Nasional 2019--2021, 2021. Secretariate of Directorate General of Estate Crops. In: Directorate General of Estate Crops. Ministry of Agriculture. Accessed at: https://repository.pertanian.go.id/items/c1b539ce-f588 -476c-9491-ce83e5d29f62.   Life cycle assessment of two palm oil production systems  H  Stichnothe    F  Schuchardt    10.1016/j.biombioe.2011.06.001     Biomass Bioenergy  35  9    2011    Stichnothe, H., Schuchardt, F., 2011. Life cycle assessment of two palm oil production systems. Biomass Bioenergy 35 (9), 3976-3984. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. biombioe.2011.06.001.   Building a tool to overcome barriers in research-implementation spaces: the conservation evidence database  W  J  Sutherland    N  G  Taylor    D  Macfarlane    T  Amano    A  P  Christie    L  V  Dicks    A  J  Lemasson    N  A  Littlewood    P  A  Martin    N  Ockendon    S  O  Petrovan    R  J  Robertson    R  Rocha    G  E  Shackelford    R  K  Smith    E  H M  Tyler    C  F R  Wordley    10.1016/j.biocon.2019.108199     Biol. Conserv  238  2019. June    Sutherland, W.J., Taylor, N.G., MacFarlane, D., Amano, T., Christie, A.P., Dicks, L.V., Lemasson, A.J., Littlewood, N.A., Martin, P.A., Ockendon, N., Petrovan, S.O., Robertson, R.J., Rocha, R., Shackelford, G.E., Smith, R.K., Tyler, E.H.M., Wordley, C. F.R., 2019. Building a tool to overcome barriers in research-implementation spaces: the conservation evidence database. Biol. Conserv. 238 (June) https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.biocon.2019.108199.     Oilseeds: World Markets and Trade  2023   USDA    USDA, 2023. Oilseeds: World Markets and Trade. Accessed at: https://fas.usda.go v/data/oilseeds-world-markets-and-trade.   No evidence for trade-offs between bird diversity, yield and water table depth on oil palm smallholdings: Implications for tropical peatland landscape restoration  E  Warren-Thomas    F  Agus    P  G  Akbar    M  Crowson    K  C  Hamer    B  Hariyadi    J  A  Hodgson    W  D  Kartika    M  Lopes    J  M  Lucey    D  Mustaqim    N  Pettorelli    A  Saad    W  Sari    G  Sukma    L  C  Stringer    C  Ward    J  K  Hill    10.1111/1365-2664.14135     J. Appl. Ecol    2022. January    Warren-Thomas, E., Agus, F., Akbar, P.G., Crowson, M., Hamer, K.C., Hariyadi, B., Hodgson, J.A., Kartika, W.D., Lopes, M., Lucey, J.M., Mustaqim, D., Pettorelli, N., Saad, A., Sari, W., Sukma, G., Stringer, L.C., Ward, C., Hill, J.K., 2022. No evidence for trade-offs between bird diversity, yield and water table depth on oil palm smallholdings: Implications for tropical peatland landscape restoration. J. Appl. Ecol. (January), 1231-1247. https://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2664.14135.   The Guineo-Congolian region and its relationships to other Phytochoria  F  White    10.2307/3667815     Bulletin Du Jardin Botanique National de Belgique  49  1/2  11  1979    White, F., 1979. The Guineo-Congolian region and its relationships to other Phytochoria. Bulletin Du Jardin Botanique National de Belgique 49 (1/2), 11. https://doi.org/ 10.2307/3667815.   Welcome to the Tidyverse  H  Wickham    M  Averick    J  Bryan    W  Chang    L  Mcgowan    R  François    G  Grolemund    A  Hayes    L  Henry    J  Hester    M  Kuhn    T  Pedersen    E  Miller    S  Bache    K  Müller    J  Ooms    D  Robinson    D  Seidel    V  Spinu    H  Yutani    10.21105/joss.01686     J. Open Source Softw  4  43  1686  2019    Wickham, H., Averick, M., Bryan, J., Chang, W., McGowan, L., François, R., Grolemund, G., Hayes, A., Henry, L., Hester, J., Kuhn, M., Pedersen, T., Miller, E., Bache, S., Müller, K., Ooms, J., Robinson, D., Seidel, D., Spinu, V., Yutani, H., 2019. Welcome to the Tidyverse. J. Open Source Softw. 4 (43), 1686. https://doi.org/ 10.21105/joss.01686.   cowplot: Streamlined Plot Theme and Plot Annotations for 'ggplot2  C  O  Wilke      2023    Wilke, C.O., 2023. cowplot: Streamlined Plot Theme and Plot Annotations for 'ggplot2'. Accessed at: https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/cowplot/index.html.   gamm4: Generalized Additive Mixed Models using 'mgcv' and 'lme4  S  Wood    F  Scheipl      2020. 2023    Wood, S., Scheipl, F., 2020. gamm4: Generalized Additive Mixed Models using 'mgcv' and 'lme4'. Accessed at: https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/gamm4/index. html. WorldClim, 2023. WorldClim. Accessed at: https://www.worldclim.org.   A protocol for conducting and presenting results of regression-type analyses  A  F  Zuur    E  N  Ieno    10.1111/2041-210X.12577     Methods Ecol. Evol  7  6    2016    Zuur, A.F., Ieno, E.N., 2016. A protocol for conducting and presenting results of regression-type analyses. Methods Ecol. Evol. 7 (6), 636-645. https://doi.org/ 10.1111/2041-210X.12577.   A Beginner's Guide to Generalised Additive Mixed Models with R  A  F  Zuur    A  A  Savaliev    E  N  Ieno    2014  Highland Statistics Ltd    Zuur, A.F., Savaliev, A.A., Ieno, E.N., 2014. A Beginner's Guide to Generalised Additive Mixed Models with R. Highland Statistics Ltd.   

     