Ecol Evol  Ecol Evol  10.1002/(ISSN)2045-7758  ECE3  Ecology and Evolution   2045-7758  John Wiley and Sons Inc.  Hoboken    6617817  31312430  10.1002/ece3.5260  ECE35260  Original Research   Original Research    Ultraconserved element (UCE) probe set design: Base genome and initial design parameters critical for optimization  GUSTAFSON et al.   Gustafson  Grey T.   https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2014-7128  gtgustafson@gmail.com   1   2    Alexander  Alana   https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6456-7757  2   3    Sproul  John S.   https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6747-3537  4   5    Pflug  James M.   4    Maddison  David R.   https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7152-3824  4    Short  Andrew E. Z.   https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7467-7116  1   2     1   Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology  University of Kansas  Lawrence  Kansas   2   Biodiversity Institute  University of Kansas  Lawrence  Kansas   3   Department of Anatomy, School of Biomedical Sciences  University of Otago  Dunedin  New Zealand   4   Department of Integrative Biology  Oregon State University  Corvallis  Oregon   5   Department of Biology  University of Rochester  Rochester  New York   *  Correspondence  Grey T. Gustafson, Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas.  Email:  gtgustafson@gmail.com      11  6  2019   6  2019   9  12  10.1002/ece3.2019.9.issue-12  6933  6948  08  4  2019   26  4  2019   28  4  2019    © 2019 The Authors. Ecology and Evolution published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.   This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.       Abstract  Targeted capture and enrichment approaches have proven effective for phylogenetic study. Ultraconserved elements (UCEs) in particular have exhibited great utility for phylogenomic analyses, with the software package phyluce being among the most utilized pipelines for UCE phylogenomics, including probe design. Despite the success of UCEs, it is becoming increasing apparent that diverse lineages require probe sets tailored to focal taxa in order to improve locus recovery. However, factors affecting probe design and methods for optimizing probe sets to focal taxa remain underexplored. Here, we use newly available beetle (Coleoptera) genomic resources to investigate factors affecting UCE probe set design using  phyluce . In particular, we explore the effects of stringency during initial design steps, as well as base genome choice on resulting probe sets and locus recovery. We found that both base genome choice and initial bait design stringency parameters greatly alter the number of resultant probes included in final probe sets and strongly affect the number of loci detected and recovered during in silico testing of these probe sets. In addition, we identify attributes of base genomes that correlated with high performance in probe design. Ultimately, we provide a recommended workflow for using  phyluce to design an optimized UCE probe set that will work across a targeted lineage, and use our findings to develop a new, open‐source UCE probe set for beetles of the suborder Adephaga. 

  bait design  genomics  phylogenetics  phylogenomics  probe design  ultraconserved elements   National Institutes of Health  5K12GM063651             source-schema-version-number  2.0   component-id  ece35260   cover-date  June 2019   details-of-publishers-convertor  Converter:WILEY_ML3GV2_TO_NLMPMC version:5.6.6.2 mode:remove_FC converted:29.07.2019     Gustafson  GT  ,  Alexander  A  ,  Sproul  JS  ,  Pflug  JM  ,  Maddison  DR  ,  Short  AEZ  .  Ultraconserved element (UCE) probe set design: Base genome and initial design parameters critical for optimization .  Ecol Evol .  2019 ;  9 :  6933 –  6948 .  10.1002/ece3.5260  31312430  

 Data Availability Statement: DNA sequences: GenBank MK838494 to MK838511;  phyluce BED/BAM files for probe design experiments and Adephaga_2.9Kv1 final probe set fasta file: Dryad doi:10.5061/dryad.2f62927; Custom scripts: Alexander 2018a: Comparing_monolithic_UCE_fastas available from;  https://github.com/laninsky/comparing_monolithic_UCE_fastas ; Alexander 2018b: Phase_target available from  https://github.com/laninsky/reference_aligning_to_established_loci/tree/master/phase_target ; Alexander 2018c: distance_calcs available from:  https://github.com/laninsky/distance_calcs ; Alexander 2018d: Phase_everyone available from  https://github.com/laninsky/reference_aligning_to_established_loci/tree/master/phase_everyone . 

     1  INTRODUCTION  The phylogenomics revolution is underway with targeted capture and enrichment approaches (Mamanova et al., 2010 ; McCormack, Hird, Zellmer, Carstens, & Brumfield,  2013 ) proving an effective and improved method for phylogenetic studies relative to multilocus Sanger techniques (Blaimer et al.,  2015 ). Among the genomic components that have been targeted, ultraconserved elements (UCEs sensu Faircloth et al.,  2012 ) have demonstrated their utility in reconstructing phylogenies across diverse vertebrate [e.g., fishes (Faircloth, Sorenson, Santini, & Alfaro,  2013 ), birds (Hosner, Tobias, Braun, & Kimball,  2017 ; McCormack et al.,  2013 ), reptiles (Crawford et al.,  2012 ; Grismer et al.,  2016 ; Streicher & Wiens,  2017 ), amphibians (Alexander et al.,  2017 ; Streicher et al.,  2018 ), and mammals (Esselstyn, Oliveros, Swanson, & Faircloth,  2017 ; McCormack et al.,  2012 )] and other animal lineages [e.g., cnidarians (Quattrini et al.,  2018 ), arachnids (Starrett et al.,  2017 ), hymenopterans (Faircloth, Branstetter, White, & Brady,  2015 ), and coleopterans (Baca, Alexander, Gustafson, & Short,  2017 ; Van Dam et al.,  2017 )], providing resolution for notoriously difficult‐to‐reconstruct evolutionary histories, such as those of placental mammals (Esselstyn et al.,  2017 ) or the rapid radiation of modern birds (McCormack et al.,  2013 ). Additionally, UCEs are phylogenetically informative at multiple timescales (Faircloth et al.,  2012 ): able to reconstruct both deep (Quattrini et al.,  2018 ) and shallow (Manthey, Campillo, Burns, & Moyle,  2016 ; Musher & Cracraft,  2018 ; Smith, Harvey, Faircloth, Glenn, & Brumfield,  2014 ) evolutionary relationships. Furthermore, UCEs allow for the inclusion of museum specimens (Blaimer, Lloyd, Guillory, & Brady,  2016 ; McCormack, Tsai, & Faircloth,  2016 ; Van Dam et al.,  2017 ), even those preserved in formalin (Ruane & Austin,  2017 ), affording improved taxon sampling by removing limitations associated with specimen preservation style. 

 Another advantage to the use of UCEs is the ability to develop probe sets that target thousands of orthologous loci across members of a select organismal group, based on low coverage genomic reads from relatively few exemplar taxa (Faircloth, 2017 ). While universal probe sets designed to work across larger taxonomic groups such as tetrapods (Faircloth et al.,  2012 ; Sun et al.,  2014 ) have proven successful for birds (Hosner et al.,  2017 ; Manthey et al.,  2016 ) and mammals (Esselstyn et al.,  2017 ), it is becoming increasingly apparent that for other diverse animal lineages probe sets tailored to focal taxa result in considerably improved locus recovery. For example, the first Hymenoptera UCE probe set, designed largely using the genome of a single parasitoid wasp species, targeted a total of 1,500 UCE loci, but captured decreasing numbers of loci with increasing phylogenetic distance from this taxon, with one highly divergent study species within Hymenoptera having as few as 341 loci enriched by the probe set (Faircloth et al.,  2015 ). Thus, Branstetter, Longino, Ward, and Faircloth (  2017 ) subsequently developed an expanded Hymenoptera UCE probe set tailored for use in ants, which successfully increased locus capture for target ant taxa, but similarly showed decreased capture rates for more distantly related ants, bees, and wasps. In another example, Faircloth (  2017 ) designed a Coleoptera UCE probe set, primarily using genomes from the beetle suborder Polyphaga. This probe set, targeting 1,172 UCE loci, only recovered 305 loci in 50% of the taxa studied in a phylogenomic analysis of the distantly related beetle suborder Adephaga (Baca et al.,  2017 ). A second investigation by Van Dam et al.,  2017 utilized this same probe set for a phylogenomic analysis of weevils (family Curculionidae), members of the same suborder of beetles used during the probe design (Faircloth,  2017 ). Although capturing considerably more loci (537 loci at 50% data matrix completeness) than the prior study, it still resulted in significantly fewer UCE loci for phylogenetic analysis (368 in the 70% complete data matrix) (Van Dam et al.,  2017 ) than the probe set was designed to provide. This is likely due to the single representative weevil genome used (  Dendroctonus ponderosae ) in the design of the Coleoptera UCE probe set by Faircloth (  2017 ) being only distantly related to those in the Van Dam et al. (  2017 ) study. 

 In spite of the apparent need for probe sets tailored to focal taxa, factors affecting probe design and methods for optimizing probe sets to focal taxa remain largely underexplored (Branstetter et al., 2017 ; Glenn & Faircloth,  2016 ). The need for investigation of factors affecting probe design is made even greater by the increasing number of genomic resources becoming readily available for diverse organisms, and the development of new software enabling probe design. 

 In this study, we investigate factors affecting probe set design of UCE loci. In particular, we investigate the effect of base genome choice and initial bait design parameters on the resulting probe set, and the number of UCE loci recovered during in silico tests. Currently, there are relatively few thorough workflows or pipelines and associated programs for identifying conserved loci and designing baits targeting them (Campana, 2018 ; Faircloth,  2017 ; Johnson et al.,  2016 ; Mayer et al.,  2016 ). We opted to use one of the most widely utilized software packages for UCE phylogenomics,  phyluce (Faircloth,  2016 ), and to follow the workflow outlined in detail by Faircloth (  2017 ) for using  phyluce to identify and design baits targeting UCE loci. Based on our results, we provide recommendations and discuss considerations for base genome choice and parameter selections to optimize the design of UCE probe sets using  phyluce . Our findings are then applied to develop a new UCE probe set, optimized for beetles of the suborder Adephaga, using newly available genomic resources and incorporating previously published Coleoptera UCE loci. 

  2  MATERIALS AND METHODS  2.1  Genomic resources and taxon information  Genomic assemblies used in this study were generated using Illumina reads obtained from seven beetle species from the suborder Adephaga (Table 1 ) (Pflug, Holmes, Johnston, and Maddison, in prep). Full details are given in Pflug, Holmes, Johnston, and Maddison (in prep); in brief, poor quality reads and adapter sequences were trimmed from Illumina reads using the “Trim Sequences” tool in  clc genomics workbench version 9.5.3 (CLC Bio, referred to below as CLC GW), with the trim quality score limit set to 0.5, allowing for a maximum of two ambiguities per read, and searching on both strands to remove adapters, retaining broken pairs. De novo assemblies of paired, trimmed reads in CLC GW were generated using automatic word and bubble size, with the minimum contig length set to 200 bases. Genomic assembly metrics for the genomes used in this study are given in Table  1 (methods for obtaining these metrics are provided in Section  2.9 ). 

 Table 1  Study taxa and associated genomic assembly information. OSAC, Oregon State Arthropod Collection located at Oregon State University

                      Species  Voucher # Depository   Family  Estimated read depth  N50  L50  N90  L90  GC%  BUSCO C% 

  Bembidion    haplogonum Chaudoir   DNA2544 OSAC   Carabidae  58×  591  211,693  231  972,875  30.6  59.3 

 Chlaenius sericeus (Forster)   DNA4821 OSAC   Carabidae  166×  1,765  41,747  408  190,237  29  78.7 

 Lionepha “Waterfalls”   DNA3782 OSAC   Carabidae  8×  5,477  9,102  518  47,974  28.6  68.5 

 Pterostichus melanarius (Illiger)   DNA3787 OSAC   Carabidae  33×  346  216,023  137  864,146  48.8  30.7 

 Omoglymmius hamatus (LeConte)   DNA3783 OSAC   Rhysodidae  13×  370  234,264  143  963,963  50  7.3 

 Trachypachus gibbsii LeConte   DNA3786 OSAC   Trachypachidae  85×  1,758  34,686  213  233,955  32.8  45.8 

 Amphizoa insolens LeConte   DNA3784 OSAC   Amphizoidae  8×  364  160,074  141  668,749  32.3  34.7 

 

 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd    Our study species come from four different families within the beetle suborder Adephaga (Table 1 ). The suborder is diverse, consisting of ~45,000 species (Ślipiński, Leschen, & Lawrence,  2011 ) exhibiting a wide range of ecologies with both terrestrial and aquatic members. These ecological differences have been used to divide the suborder into two groups: the Hydradephaga containing aquatic members and the Geadephaga for terrestrial species. There has yet to be a comprehensive phylogenetic analysis of the suborder using molecular data, and recent studies with limited taxon sampling have either found these two groups reciprocally monophyletic (McKenna et al.,  2015 ), or with Geadephaga sister to all aquatic families with the exception of the whirligig (the family Gyrinidae) beetles (Baca et al.,  2017 ), or sister to both Gyrinidae and Haliplidae (Zhang et al.,  2018 ). Our study taxa consist largely of families within the Geadephaga with a single hydradephagan representative,  Amphizoa , belonging to one of the aquatic families consistently supported as sister to the Geadephaga (Baca et al.,  2017 ; McKenna et al.,  2015 ). 

 The lack of a comprehensive time‐calibrated phylogeny of Adephaga prevents precise estimates of the evolutionary time and phylogenetic distance separating the species in our study. However, the maximum evolutionary time separating our study species is approximately 250 million years, which is similar in age to the estimated split between turtles and archosaurs (Chiari, Cahais, Galtier, & Delsuc, 2012 ; Shen, Liang, Wen, & Zhang,  2011 ; Toussaint et al.,  2017 ). 

  2.2  Overview  Using the above genomic resources and the software package phyluce , we developed multiple UCE probe sets while systematically altering key aspects of the design strategy. Throughout this study, we use the term “bait” to refer to the temporary bait sets targeting theoretical conserved loci (an intermediate stage in probe design), with “probe” referring to the final products of probe design (i.e., the set of RNA probes targeting UCE loci that would actually be synthesized, subject to in silico testing). First, we explored the effects of changing which taxon served as the base genome during probe design, a critical decision, as the genomic reads of all other taxa are mapped to this genome in order to identify conserved loci. The second round of experiments focused on the effects of changing the stringency parameters used during temporary bait design in  phyluce . Our general workflow for using  phyluce to develop probe sets, and the specific methods for our experimentation are provided below. We evaluated the success of the different probe sets by tracking the number of loci identified and/or recovered during the different stages of probe design within  phyluce , the number of probes developed, and finally by comparison of the UCE loci recovered during in silico tests. After producing optimized probes, we filtered the probe set to a subset of probes targeting only those loci found within all seven taxa that appear paralogy free. We then used  baitstools as an additional check of our final subset of optimized probes in order to identify physical attributes that could affect their synthesis and in vitro utility. Finally, we investigated attributes of base genomes (e.g., assembly metrics and genetic distance from other study taxa) potentially correlated with improved probe design. 

  2.3  Phyluce workflow overview  A detailed workflow for using phyluce to identify UCE loci and to design probes targeting these loci is described by Faircloth (  2017 ). The general  phyluce work flow followed for our experiments is given in Figure  1 . The first step in our experiments involved selection of a base genome (Figure  1 , step 1) against which genomic reads of the remaining taxa were aligned (Figure  1 , step 2). Following removal of duplicate reads, the next step (Figure  1 , step 3) identified  putative loci : highly conserved loci shared among taxa (see Supporting Information for corresponding  phyluce terminology and commands).  Putative loci are those present in the base genome as well as a specified number of additional taxa. The stringency at this step is varied (Figure  1 b, step 3) by changing the number of taxa the locus must be found within, ranging from  putative loci found within the base genome and at least one other taxon (“+1”, the least stringent, designated as “at least one other taxon” on Figure  1 b), to those found within the base genome and all remaining taxa (“+6”, the most stringent, designated as “all 6 taxa” on Figure  1 b, that is,  putative loci are defined as those found in the base genome and all six additional taxa). Temporary baits were then developed targeting these  putative loci . These temporary baits were then aligned back to the genomic assemblies of all study taxa (Figure  1 , step 4). This allowed the identification of  candidate loci : loci for which temporary baits consistently aligned across the genomes of multiple taxa (Figure  1 , step 5). By varying the number of taxa within which the candidate loci must be found within, an additional stringency filter can be applied. In the example shown in step 5 of Figure  1 , the candidate loci chosen were those for which the temporary baits matched regions in all seven taxa (the base genome plus the other six taxa)—the most stringent option. The final probe set was then created by designing probes customized specifically for each taxon to allow enrichment of the same locus, across the specified number of taxa, using the previously identified  candidate loci . Finally, an in silico test (Figure  1 , step 6) of the resulting probe set was performed using the genomic assemblies of all study taxa in order to assess the number of UCE loci recovered by the final probe set in semirealistic conditions. The purpose of using  recovered loci (loci recovered in the in silico test) to evaluate the choices involved in probe set design rather than the final probe sets themselves was in part to emulate some of the stochastic variation likely to be seen attempting to recover these loci in vitro. 

 Figure 1  General phyluce workflow for the two sets of probe design experiments conducted using  phyluce . Workflow proceeds from left to right with the numbers above text blocks indicating steps referenced in text. (a) depicts the base genome choice experiments described in Section  2.4 . (b) depicts the temporary bait design stringency experiments described in Section  2.5 . A key for the figure is given in the bottom left corner. “Baits” refer to the temporary bait sets targeting theoretical conserved loci, with “probes” referring to the final products of probe design (i.e., the set of RNA probes targeting UCE loci that would actually be synthesized). Areas highlighted in red show targeted loci/baits that were found across the specified number of taxa. Results depicting the  putative loci (highly conserved loci shared among taxa),  candidate loci (loci where temporary baits align across genomes of multiple taxa), and the  recovered loci (UCE loci recovered during the in silico test) are shown in Figures  2 ,  3 ,  4 ,  5 ,  6 . The red boxes in the final probe set section indicate the combination of parameters leading to the largest number of in silico recovered probes for each set of experiments 

     We applied this workflow to two separate experiments: first, evaluating the use of different taxa as the base genome (Figure 1 a, see Section  2.4 for additional methods), and second, varying different parameters for temporary probe design (Figure  1 b, see Section  2.5 for additional methods). 

  2.4  Testing the effect of base genome choice on probe design and locus recovery  To test the influence of base genome choice on probe design and locus recovery, we performed the following steps in phyluce (Faircloth,  2016 ) (as outlined in the  phyluce Tutorial IV, available at  http://phyluce.readthedocs.io/en/latest/tutorial-four.html ). First, a single taxon was selected to serve as the base genome (Faircloth,  2017 ) (Figure  1 a, step 1) and the genomic reads of the remaining taxa were aligned to this genome using  stampy (Lunter & Goodson,  2011 ) (Figure  1 a, step 2) under the following mapping parameters: ‐‐maxbasequal 93, ‐‐substitutionrate = 0.05, and insertsize = 400. From the resulting alignment, we identified  putative loci shared among the base taxon and the remaining study taxa. In this base genome choice experiment, we then proceeded with the most stringent approach to temporary bait design, targeting only those  putative loci shared across the base genome as well as all six other taxa (Figure  1 a, step 3). The influence of modifying the stringency of this step is evaluated by the experiment presented in the next section. We then determined the number of  candidate loci (where temporary baits consistently aligned across multiple genomes; Figure  1 a, step 4). Following this, we took a stringent approach to designing the final probe set by targeting only  candidate loci found within all seven of the study taxa (the base genome plus all six other taxa) (Figure  1 a, step 5). After design of the final probe set, we performed an in silico test (Figure  1 a, step 6) of the resulting probes using the genomic assemblies of all the study taxa to determine the number of  recovered loci by the probe set. 

 Finally, the UCE loci extracted from each species during the in silico test were aligned using mafft (Katoh & Standley,  2013 ), ambiguous regions removed via  gblocks (Castresana,  2000 ; Talavera & Castresana,  2007 ), and a 75% complete matrix generated in  phyluce using the command “phyluce_align_get_only_loci_with_min_taxa.” A maximum‐likelihood phylogenetic analysis was performed on this matrix using  raxml 8.8.1 (Stamatakis,  2014 ) and the commands ‐m GTRGAMMA, ‐# autoMRE ‐n BOOT ‐T 24, to investigate any variance among the phylogenetic reconstructions obtained using loci recovered from probe sets designed with different base genomes. 

 These steps were repeated changing only the taxon that served as the base genome (Figure 1 a, step 1). 

 Following comparison of probe sets designed using different base genomes and their success at locus recovery, we investigated attributes of base genomes potentially correlated with their probe design success. These attributes included genomic assembly metrics such as average estimated read depth, N50, L50, N90, L90, Guanine and Cytosine (GC) percent content, and BUSCO completeness percentage (Simão, Waterhouse, Ioannidis, Kriventseva, & Zdobnov, 2015 ), as well as average relative genetic distance to the other taxa included in this study. These methods are presented in Sections  2.8 and  2.9 . 

  2.5  Testing temporary bait design stringency's influence on probe design and locus recovery  Following investigation into how base genome choice influences probe design and locus recovery, we experimented with relaxing temporary bait design stringency. This involved modifying the step in the phyluce workflow in which temporary baits are constructed based on the identification of  putative loci shared among the aligned genomic data (Figure  1 b, step 3). We incrementally decreased the number of taxa  putative loci were required to be identified within when designing temporary baits (Figure  1 b, step 3). We began first with the most stringent requirement for temporary bait design by targeting  putative loci found across the base genome and all six other taxa and ended by targeting those found across the base genome and at least one other taxon, the least stringent temporary bait design. We then proceeded to follow the same steps as in Section  2.4 through to the in silico test. It should be emphasized that we maintained the stringent requirement of designing the final probe set based only on  candidate loci present within all seven study taxa (Figure  1 b, step 5). We selected the taxon  Lionepha to serve as the base genome throughout these tests as it performed moderately well during the base genome choice experiments, being neither the best, nor worst performing genome. After establishing that  Pterostichus appeared to be the optimum base genome, we also repeated the temporary bait stringency experiment on this base genome, to ensure the results were robust to base genome choice. 

  2.6  Comparison of resulting probe sets  To establish which UCE loci were shared between the probe sets designed using different base genomes in Section 2.4 , we used custom bash and R‐scripts to BLAST (at 95% and 99% similarity) between the monolithic files (containing all UCE loci identified across all taxa for each base genome) produced by  phyluce (see Alexander 2018a under Data Accessibility for step‐by‐step commands). Loci with single BLAST matches across at least two base genomes for at least one taxon were characterized as: “good” (UCE loci that appeared to be single copy across all taxa across all base genomes), “problematic within taxa” (evidence of potential paralogy within one or more taxa where loci identified within a taxon using one base genome matched to multiple loci within that same taxon identified using a different base genome), and “problematic between taxa” (potential lineage‐specific paralogy: a UCE locus that appeared to be single copy across all base genomes within one taxon appeared to be present in multiple copies in at least one other taxon). We used the “good loci” to identify the base genomes that had the greatest success recovering loci across the seven taxa and that gave the longest alignment in each taxon. 

  2.7  In vitro attributes of final subset of optimized probes  We examined aspects of the final subset of optimized probes designed during this study that could potentially affect synthesis and in vitro utility. We gathered relevant information on the final optimized subset of probes designed during this study relevant to in vitro performance including GC% content, melting temperature (Tm), and sequence complexity, using baitstools (Campana,  2018 ) and the “checkbaits” command under the following parameters: ‐L 120 ‐c ‐n 25 ‐x 70 ‐q 80 ‐z 120 ‐w. 

  2.8  Genome assembly metrics  We estimated depth of coverage for each genome by mapping reads to the subset of “good” UCE loci (identified using the methods in Section 2.6 ) that were also found in all seven taxa. The specific reference sequences used for each locus depended on how many base genomes were able to characterize that UCE locus. If a UCE locus was detected only with one base genome, then the UCE locus sequences from this base genome were used as references. If a given locus was recovered using more than one base, then the base genome that gave the longest average alignment across all taxa was selected to provide the reference sequences. We extracted the UCE locus sequences for each taxon using custom bash scripts (see Alexander 2018a under Data Accessibility for step‐by‐step commands). Then, we used GATK v 3.8/4.0, picard, bwa, MAFFT, R, samtools, stringr with custom scripts (see Alexander 2018d under Data Accessibility for step‐by‐step commands) to calculate depth of coverage on a per‐locus basis. 

 Additional genomic assembly metrics such as N50, L50, N90, L90, Guanine and Cytosine (GC) percent content, and completeness of conserved protein‐coding genes were generated using clc gw v9.5.3 (available from  https://www.qiagenbioinformatics.com/ ),  bbmap (Bushnell,  2014 ) using the stats.sh tool, and BUSCO (Simão et al.,  2015 ). 

  2.9  Estimating relatedness of study taxa  We inferred the relative divergence between the taxa in our study for several markers commonly used in phylogenetic investigations of Coleoptera: 18S, 28S, ArgK, CAD2, CAD4, wg , and COI. These markers were obtained either for species included in this study, or for their congeners. Some of these sequences were obtained from the base genomes (CAD2 for  Trachypachus and  Lionepha , and COI of all taxa except  Bembidion haplogonum ). The rest were obtained from the literature (Gomez, Will, & Maddison,  2016 ; Kanda, Pflug, Sproul, Dasenko, & Maddison,  2015 ; Maddison,  2012 ; Maddison Baker, & Ober,  1999a ,  1999b ; Maddison et al.,  2009 ; Maddison & Swanson,  2010 ; McKenna et al.,  2015 ; Ober,  2002 ; Sproul & Maddison,  2017 ), or were newly obtained from Sanger sequencing of PCR products, as specified in Supplemental Information Table  S1 . Methods for obtaining the new sequences from PCR/Sanger sequencing are given in Maddison (  2012 ). New sequences have been submitted to GenBank with accession numbers  MK838494 to  MK838511 . 

 We used Geneious ® 11.0.5 to calculate average pairwise genetic distances, average proportion of differences (using both Tamura–Nei and HKY corrections), and patristic distances from a neighbor‐joining tree using the Tamura–Nei correction. We ranked taxa from the smallest average genetic distance across markers and methods to the largest average distance. 

 Additionally, we attempted to extract 50 nuclear protein‐coding markers developed for Coleoptera phylogenetics from genomewide surveys (Che et al., 2017 ) directly from our study genomes using bait sequences from related taxa available on GenBank via the Zhang et al. (  2018 ) study (Appendix  S1 ). We extracted these nuclear protein‐coding markers from our genomic assemblies using bwa (Li & Durbin,  2009 ,  2010 ), data.table (Dowle & Srinivasan,  2017 ), GATK (McKenna et al.,  2010 ), MAFFT (Katoh & Standley,  2013 ), picard (available from:  http://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/ ), R (R Core Team,  2017 ), samtools (Li et al.,  2009 ), and stringr (Wickham,  2017 ) via custom scripts (see Alexander 2018b under Data Availability for step‐by‐step commands). This was done in an attempt to better approximate divergences of the entire nuclear genomes among our taxa. We then generated relative genetic distance measures among these nuclear protein‐coding markers for our study taxa using EMBOSS distmat (Rice, Longden, & Bleasby,  2000 ) with a Tamura correction and R via custom scripts (see Alexander 2018c under Data Availability for step‐by‐step commands). Finally, we compared these findings with those of the more commonly used phylogenetic loci represented in our six gene dataset, run through the same distance measures pipeline. 

   3  RESULTS  3.1  The effect of base genome choice on probe design and locus recovery  The effect of base genome choice was evident at each stage of the workflow (Figure 1 a) from the number of  putative loci identified (Figure  2 , Data  S1 ), to the number of  candidate loci (Figure  3 , Data  S2 ), and finally the number of  recovered loci during the in silico test (Figure  4 , Data  S3 ). There were also consistent trends in the performance of taxa selected to serve as the base genome. For example, the genomes of  Amphizoa and  Omoglymmius resulted in the fewest number of  putative loci (Figure  2 ),  candidate loci (Figure  3 ), and  recovered loci (Figure  4 ). These base genomes also resulted in the fewest number of probes designed, as well as the shortest overall sequence lengths recovered across taxa (see Data  S2 and S3). 

 Figure 2  Number of putative loci (highly conserved loci shared among taxa) recovered using different base genomes during probe design 

     Figure 3  Number of candidate loci (loci where temporary baits align across genomes of multiple taxa) shared among different numbers of taxa using different base genomes during probe design 

     Figure 4  Number of recovered loci (UCE loci recovered during the in silico test) shared among different taxa for probe sets designed using different base genomes. All categories provide the sum total of unique loci recovered for that base genome across all taxa 

     The taxa Bembidion ,  Lionepha , and  Trachypachus performed considerably better as base genomes, resulting in more  putative loci (Figure  2 ),  candidate loci (Figure  3 ), and  recovered loci (Figure  4 ), as well as the design of tens of thousands more probes (Data  S2 ).  Chlaenius performed even better as the base genome and was the base genome that resulted in the largest number of  putative loci shared among all six of the other taxa (Figure  2 ). However,  Chlaenius did not result in the most  candidate loci found across all seven taxa (Figure  3 ) nor  recovered loci during the in silico test (including  Chlaenius itself; Figure  4 ). This suggests the number of  putative loci , while tracking general trends in a taxon's performance as the base genome, is not an accurate predictor of the best performing base genome for downstream locus detection and recovery. 

 The best performing base genome was Pterostichus . Using  Pterostichus as the base genome resulted in the largest number of  candidate loci (Figure  3 ) found across all seven taxa, and the largest number of  recovered loci (including the most  recovered loci for  Pterostichus itself; Figure  4 ). The use of  Pterostichus as a base genome resulted in baits targeting several hundred (i.e., 8%) more loci than the second‐best performing genome,  Chlaenius , concordantly reflected in the design of several thousand (i.e., ~7%) more probes (Data  S2 ).  Pterostichus resulted in several hundred (i.e., 6%) more  recovered loci during the in silico test (Figure  4 ) than  Chlaenius , and the resulting concatenated final alignment across taxa was several hundred thousand base pairs (i.e., ~6%) longer than that of  Chlaenius (Data  S3 ). Despite these differences in performance at recovering and detecting UCE loci, base genome choice did not affect the topology, nor support values of the final maximum‐likelihood phylogenies produced (Figure  S1 ). 

  3.2  Stringency of temporary bait design's effect on probe design and locus recovery  The temporary bait design stringency experiments revealed less stringent parameters for bait design (i.e., requiring sharing of putative loci across fewer taxa) greatly improved the number of  candidate loci identified (Figure  5 , Data  S4 ), as well as the number of  recovered loci during the in silico test (Figure  6 , Data  S5 ). 

 Figure 5  Number of candidate loci (loci where temporary baits align across genomes of multiple taxa) found across increasing numbers of taxa for each temporary bait design stringency (requiring loci to be found in the base genome +1 other taxon through to the base genome +6 taxa) 

     Figure 6  Number of recovered loci (UCE loci recovered during the in silico test) in different taxa from probe sets designed using  Lionepha and  Pterostichus as base genomes and varying the temporary bait design stringency requirements (requiring loci to be found in the base genome +1 other taxon through to the base genome +6 taxa). The all category provides the sum total of unique loci recovered for that base genome across all taxa 

      3.3  Optimized probe design  The base genome choice experiments identified Pterostichus as the optimal base genome. The results from the stringency in temporary bait design experiments showed decreasing the number of taxa  putative loci were required to be shared across increased both the number of final probes and the number of  recovered loci during the in silico test (Figure  6 ). Therefore, to design an initial optimized UCE probe set, we selected  Pterostichus to serve as the base genome and designed temporary probes under the least stringent requirements, targeting  putative loci found within the base genome and at least one other taxon. 

  3.4  Comparison of probe sets based on loci found across different probe designs  Using the recovered loci (i.e., those identified during the in silico test) from the seven base genome choice experiments, as well as the final optimized  Pterostichus +1 probe design, we identified 8,159 loci through BLAST that matched at 99% similarity across more than one base genome for at least one taxon (95% similarity results revealed very similar patterns, so these results are presented only in Data  S6 and  S7 ). Of these, 3,501 “good loci” showed no sign of paralogy within or among taxa across the various base genomes used. Comparisons of base genome performance based on recovery of these “good loci” largely reflected the previously presented results. When  Pterostichus served as the base genome with temporary baits designed from  putative loci found in just one other taxon (  Pterostichus +1 taxon), the largest number of “good loci” were recovered for each taxon in comparison with all other base genomes (Figure  7 , Data  S8 ). This pattern persisted even when restricting the comparison to the 2,702 “good loci” detected in all seven taxa and thus does not seem to be an artifact of overrepresentation of loci found only in  Pterostichus but absent in other lineages (Data  S9 ). We also compared the impact of base genome selection on sequence length of the “good loci” found across all seven study taxa. This could be an important metric, as phylogenetically informative variation in UCEs tends to be greater in the DNA sequences flanking the core conserved element (Faircloth et al.,  2012 ; Van Dam et al.,  2017 ). Longer sequence lengths are therefore more likely to recover these more variable regions. For each “good locus” found in all seven taxa, we recorded the number of taxa where a base genome gave the longest or equally longest sequence lengths across all base genomes. These results again showed that  Pterostichus (specifically  Pterostichus +1 taxon) appeared to be the optimal base genome/stringency choice: It resulted in a larger number of loci where it gave the longest alignment for more taxa than the other base genomes (Data  S9 ). 

 Figure 7  Number of “good loci” (UCE loci that appeared to be single copy across all taxa across all base genomes) recovered in different taxa from probe sets designed using different base genomes

      3.5  Final optimized probe set  The optimized probe design ( Pterostichus +1 taxon) resulted in a probe set consisting of 145,599 probes, targeting 11,162 UCE loci. However, synthesizing and enriching this large number of probes and loci would be cost prohibitive for phylogenomic studies with large numbers of taxa. We therefore needed a way to naturally limit the number of probes included in the final probe set. The initial optimized probe set was filtered to a final set of probes targeting the 2,702 “good loci” detected in all seven taxa discussed in Section  3.4 . This was done using custom scripts (see Alexander 2018d under Data Accessibility for step‐by‐step commands) and was further limited to only those loci covered by the  Ptersotichus +1 probes (i.e., the optimized probe design), as 858 loci were derived under other probe design parameters (i.e., different base genomes and temporary bait stringency). Therefore, the final subset of optimized probes targets 2,643 loci that appear paralogy free and are present within all seven study taxa. As part of the final probe set, we also included probes for 305 loci from the previous Coleoptera 1.1Kv1 probe set (Faircloth,  2017 ) that were successfully recovered during the Baca et al. (  2017 ) study (see Section  4 section below). The final optimized probe set targets a total of 2,948 UCE loci. 

 In vitro attributes of the final subset of optimized probes (Appendix S2 ) include a GC% content of all probes between 20% and 70%, with a median of 40.83% and mean of 42%; and a Tm between 80°C and 120°C, with a median of 96.83°C and a mean of 97.69°C. The sequence complexity measure of the probes was very high with a bait linguistic complexity mean and median of 0.99. The GC% content is well within the optimal range for genomic probes (Cruz‐Dávalos et al.,  2017 ; Tewhey et al.,  2009 ) and high‐sequence complexity and Tms increase the likelihood of target specificity. 

  3.6  Assembly metrics of genomic resources used  We used the 2,702 “good” UCE loci found across all seven taxa to estimate coverage depth for the genomes utilized in this study. Genomic read coverage did not appear to correlate with base genome performance (Table 1 ).  Pterostichus , the best performing base genome, showed intermediate coverage depth (33×) relative to other taxa (Table  1 ). The worst performing base genomes,  Omoglymmius and  Amphizoa , while estimated as having relatively low coverage depths (13× and 8× respectively), were comparable to that of  Lionepha (8×) which performed considerably better as a base genome (Figure  4 ). Finally,  Chlaenius had the highest estimated coverage depth (166×), yet did not outperform  Pterostichus which had a much lower coverage depth (33×). 

 Additional genomic assembly metrics such as N50, L50, N90, L90 identified Chlaenius ,  Lionepha , and  Trachypachus as the best genomic assemblies in terms of contiguity (Figure  8 b, Table  1 , Data  S10 ), with BUSCO scores (Figure  8 c, Table  1 , Data  S10 ) supporting the  Chlaenius genome as being the most complete. Interestingly,  Pterostichus in addition to  Omoglymmius and  Amphizoa had the least complete genomic assemblies and lowest assembly metrics (Figure  8 c, Table  1 ), yet these taxa represent both the best and worst performing base genomes, respectively. Therefore, genomic assembly metrics do not appear to correlate well with base genome performance (Figure  8 b,c). Similarly, GC% content of the genome does not appear correlated with suitability as a base genome, in that the best performing base genome,  Pterostichus , had a comparable GC percentage (nearly 50%, Table  1 ) to that of one of the worst performing genomes,  Omoglymmius , while  Amphizoa (another poorly performing genome) had a GC percentage similar to those of better performing genomes (around 30%, Table  1 ). 

 Figure 8  Attributes of study taxa and their genomic assemblies in relation to their performance as base genome. (a) Relationship between average pairwise genetic distance based on six gene fragments regularly use for phylogenetics and total number of UCE loci recovered during in silico test. (b) Relationship between contiguity measure N90 of genomic assembly and total number of UCE loci recovered during in silico test. (c) Relationship between BUSCO %C value of genomic assembly and total number of UCE loci recovered during in silico test

      3.7  Pairwise genetic distances between taxa  Pairwise genetic distance rankings showed Pterostichus as having the smallest genetic distance from all other taxa in the six gene fragments commonly used in phylogenetic studies (28S, COI, CAD2, CAD4,  wg , ArgK), with  Amphizoa and  Omoglymmius the largest genetic distances (Figure  8 a, Data  S11–S13 for average‐, raw‐, and standardized pairwise genetic distance rankings). 

 We found average genetic distance ranking based on the six gene dataset to be negatively correlated with a taxon's performance as the base genome as assessed by the total number of UCE loci recovered during in silico testing (Figure 8 a), and reflected general trends in genome performance tracked elsewhere (Figures  3 ,  4 ,  5 ). 

 We attempted to validate the six gene genetic distance measure results with a larger data set by extracting 50 different nuclear protein‐coding loci directly from genomic assemblies of our study taxa (Appendix S1 and Section  2.9 ). However, this approach proved ineffective due to unevenness in genome assembly quality of our study taxa (Table  1 ) which resulted in an excess of missing or low‐quality data for taxa with assemblies having a low average depth of coverage (e.g.,  Lionepha ,  Omoglymmius , and  Amphizoa ). We determined that low coverage and missing data affected data quality for these taxa based on an evident correlation between low sequencing coverage and large genetic distance (Data  S14–S19 ), as well as a maximum‐likelihood phylogenetic analysis of the data set using IQTree (Nguyen, Schmidt, Haeseler, & Minh,  2015 ), which failed to recover well‐established sister relationships as explained in more detail in Data  S20 . 

   4  DISCUSSION  Our study using adephagan beetles as an example demonstrates that altering the base genome used during probe design can greatly alter the number of resultant probes included in the final probe set, and more importantly, strongly affects the number of loci detected and recovered during in silico tests. The base genome that recovered the largest number of in silico loci, Pterostichus , also performed better at recovering the longest sequences across the seven taxa included in this study. As variable regions flanking core UCEs contain phylogenetically informative sequence data (Faircloth et al.,  2012 ; Van Dam et al.,  2017 ), the ability to recover longer sequences for each locus is likely particularly important for their use in phylogenetic analysis. In addition, we demonstrated that being less stringent during the temporary bait design stage, by focusing on  putative loci shared across the base genome with as few as one other taxon, resulted in a significantly better final probe set design that detected and recovered more UCE loci during in silico testing. 

 4.1  Considerations for selecting a base genome for probe design  Although we expected at the outset that higher quality base genomes would result in better final probe sets, genomic assembly metrics such as measures of completeness, average read depth, contiguity, and GC content did not appear to correlate well with base genome performance (Figure 8 , Table  1 ). The best performing genome for universal adephagan bait design,  Pterostichus , had relatively low genomic assembly metrics compared to most other taxa in the study (Table  1 ). This pattern suggests that genome assembly quality may not be a critical criterion in selecting a base genome. In reporting this finding, we acknowledge that it is possible all our assemblies were above a critical coverage threshold, below which assembly metrics may begin to show stronger correlation with probe design outcomes. Similarly, all our assemblies are limited in quality due to being generated using short‐read Illumina data, and it is possible that assemblies of much higher quality could correlate with greater probe design success. Our results are a useful reference point in that they were generated using a type (e.g., Illumina reads) and quantity (e.g., tens to hundreds of millions of reads) of sequence data that are representative of increasing numbers of unpublished genomes, but the field will benefit from further exploring how assembly quality affects probe design outcomes. 

 When introducing the workflow for using phyluce to identify and design baits targeting UCE loci, Faircloth (  2017 ) recommends that selection of an appropriate base genome not be focused on ingroup versus outgroup status, but rather annotation and genomic assembly, in order to aid later in selection of probes targeting loci with desirable properties for phylogenetic inference. This is certainly a good recommendation for groups that have well‐annotated genomic assemblies available; however, most invertebrate groups lack such genomic resources, including our study taxa. Furthermore, one of the most powerful aspects of  phyluce is its ability to identify and design probe sets for such nonmodel organisms, without the necessity of a complete and annotated genome. Our results demonstrated that UCE probe design can be successfully optimized even while using a base genome whose genomic assembly is of lower coverage and limited quality as  phyluce targets conserved regions that are present and shared among the study taxa, rather than searching for a priori known regions to target. We provide a framework for conducting base genome experiments as outlined above (Figure  1 ) for selecting a base genome in cases where maximizing the number of loci in the probe set is critical. As a less involved alternative to conducting base genome experiments, we provide evidence from a six gene data set (generated through Sanger sequencing) that selecting the taxon with the smallest average genetic distance from the suite of taxa included in probe design to serve as the base genome can correlate with optimal probe design outcomes (Figure  8 a). However, our conclusion that genetic distance patterns can guide base genome selection would benefit from further testing given that low sequencing coverage from a subset of our assemblies prevented our validation of this finding with a larger data set (Data  S14–S20 ). 

  4.2  Why does a “relaxed” approach at the temporary bait design stage result in a better probe set?  Perhaps most surprising among the results of our experiments regarding optimal probe set design are those pertaining to temporary bait design stringency. We anticipated a diminishing return in the number of candidate loci as the number of taxa  putative loci were required to share decreased. This is because we expected  putative loci initially identified as being shared among the base and only one, or a few other taxa, would be unlikely to also be present or detectable in all of the remaining taxa, thus preventing their inclusion as  candidate loci (the step where we required the baits to target loci found in all seven taxa). However, we did not find this to be the case. Instead, we found that designing temporary baits based on  putative loci shared among the base genome and as few as one other taxon resulted in significantly better probe design, detecting and recovering more UCE loci, as well as in a better performing probe set. Why this would be the case is not entirely clear. Faircloth, in his informal discussion within the  phyluce Tutorial IV (available at:  http://phyluce.readthedocs.io/en/latest/tutorial-four.html ), suggests loci that are actually present can randomly fail to be detected by  phyluce . Perhaps having a temporary bait design protocol with relaxed stringency enables the discovery of such “cryptic” loci shared among taxa. In this case, relaxed temporary bait design would be analogous to casting a wider net which captures both the “cryptic” and initially detected loci, which, when narrowed down later by more stringent parameters applied during final probe design (such as only targeting  candidate loci present in all study taxa), results in more loci detected and recovered by the final probe set. 

 It is also possible that this result is an artifact of the two different read mapping programs used by the phyluce pipeline (Faircloth,  2017 ; Faircloth pers. comm.). Genomic reads are initially aligned to the base genome (Figure  1 , step 2) using  stampy (Lunter & Goodson,  2011 ), which has different parameters than that of the  lastz (Harris,  2007 ) alignment used by  phyluce when aligning temporary baits back to entire genomic assemblies (Figure  1 , step 4). The more permissive LASTZ alignment could therefore potentially be able to detect loci ignored initially by  stampy (Faircloth pers. comm.). 

  4.3  In vitro considerations  While we focused here on the optimization of probes based on in silico testing, optimal parameters for in vitro enrichment of UCE probes have not been investigated thoroughly. Certain physical attributes are well known to affect probe efficacy, such as GC% content (Tewhey et al., 2009 ), annealing temperature (Cruz‐Dávalos et al.,  2017 ), and Gibbs free energy change (delta G) (Matveeva et al.,  2016 ). Additional in‐solution parameters such as buffer stringency (Dabney & Meyer,  2012 ), washing procedures (Li, Hofreiter, Straube, Corrigan, & Naylor,  2013 ), and touchdown approaches to hybridization temperature (Li et al.,  2013 ; Paijmans, Fickel, Courtiol, Hofreiter, & Förster,  2016 ) also affect enrichment of targeted DNA loci. While in silico testing has proven comparable to in vitro testing (Branstetter et al.,  2017 ; Starrett et al.,  2017 ), and the resulting probes designed here should prove suitable for in vitro capture and enrichment (see Section  3.5 ), there will always be certain loci that remain incalcitrant to enrichment. For this reason, as has previously been emphasized (i.e., Faircloth,  2017 ), all probe sets should be regarded as experimental until validated through in vitro testing. Future investigation of optimal enrichment parameters of UCE probes will likely help to normalize the number of loci recovered between in silico and in vitro testing. 

  4.4  Tailored UCE probe sets and universal utility  When first introduced, one of the appeals of UCEs was their ability to enrich hundreds to thousands of homologous loci across a clade (Faircloth et al., 2012 ). To a large extent, UCE probe sets such as those designed for tetrapods (Faircloth et al.,  2012 ) have accomplished this goal with the same probes working well across the major amniote lineages (Crawford et al.,  2012 ; McCormack et al.,  2012 ,  2013 ; Streicher et al.,  2018 ). However, a probe set with similar universal utility has proven harder to attain for diverse arthropod groups like Coleoptera (see Baca et al.,  2017 ; Van Dam et al.,  2017 ), which while being younger in age (estimated origin during the mid‐Carboniferous (Toussaint et al.,  2017 )) likely has over ten times the number of species (~380,000 named species; Ślipiński et al.,  2011 ); or Hymenoptera (see Branstetter et al.,  2017 ), a similarly hyperdiverse insect order which may in reality be larger than Coleoptera by as much as 3.2 times (Forbes, Bagley, Beer, Hippee, & Widmayer,  2018 ). 

 The first Coleoptera probe set designed by Faircloth ( 2017 ) recovered hundreds of loci and provided phylogenetic signal when applied to Adephaga, a suborder of beetles not originally included during probe design (Baca et al.,  2017 ). However, there was considerable conflict between different phylogenetic reconstruction methods with regard to the basal nodes of the phylogeny. Therefore, improved phylogenetic reconstruction of Adephaga would be enhanced by a probe set tailored to this lineage to target more UCE loci and increase phylogenetic resolution. While the probe set developed here was specifically optimized for universal application across Adephaga, our design notably lacked a whirligig beetle genome, as none are currently available. Whirligig beetles (Gyrinidae) comprise ~900 species (Short,  2018 ), are a relatively old family with an estimated early Triassic origin (Gustafson, Prokin, Bukontaite, Bergsten, & Miller,  2017 ), and may represent the sister lineage to all other adephagans (Baca et al.,  2017 ). Thus, the probe set designed here could similarly result in fewer loci enriched for members of the Gyrinidae relative to other adephagan families used during probe design. However, this remains to be seen through in vitro testing and, alternatively, this probe set could prove effective across all of Adephaga, preventing need for additional probes tailored to the Gyrinidae. 

 With an increase in the number of tailored probe sets, concern could be raised that this deflates the value of UCEs as different probe sets result in the recovery of different homologous loci, causing incompatibility between datasets and decreased “universality.” However, UCE probe set development and synthesis affords the ability to mix probes from different designs, diversifying the loci targeted while providing backward compatibility with older data sets (Branstetter et al., 2017 ). For example, Branstetter et al. (  2017 ) developed a probe set tailored for ant lineages that included newly developed probes targeting ant‐specific loci, while retaining probes from the original universal Hymenoptera probe set designed by Faircloth et al. (  2015 ) that worked well within ant lineages. We similarly follow this approach, and in addition to our newly developed probes (Section  3.5 ), we include as part of our final probe set 3,667 probes from the prior Coleoptera 1.1Kv1 probe set (Faircloth,  2017 ) targeting the 305 loci successfully recovered for Adephaga during the Baca et al. (  2017 ) study. 

   5  CONCLUSION  Given the need to tailor UCE probe sets to focal taxa to improve locus recovery for use in phylogenomic studies and the increasing availability of genomic resources for diverse organisms, information about factors affecting probe design and methods for optimizing locus recovery are becoming increasingly important. We found an optimized UCE probe set depends on selection of an appropriate base genome and beginning probe design with less stringent temporary bait design parameters. We recommend the following workflow (Figure 9 ) for using  phyluce to design an optimized UCE probe set for organisms without a complete and well‐annotated genome available. First, the base genome experiments shown in Figure  1 should be conducted in order to identify an optimal base genome or, alternatively, the base genome can be selected from the taxon with the smallest average genetic distance to the other study taxa as measured by independently generated molecular markers. Then, we recommend that temporary baits are designed based on  putative loci shared between the base genome and as few as one other taxon. Combined, these factors resulted in an optimized probe set for adephagan beetles, recovering the most UCE loci in in silico tests as well as the longest per‐locus alignments. We make this final optimized adephagan beetle probe set “Adephaga_2.9Kv1,” consisting of 38,948 probes, targeting 2,948 UCE loci, available under a public domain license (CC‐0), similar to the prior Coleoptera probe set designed by Faircloth (  2017 ). 

 Figure 9  Proposed workflow for designing an optimized universal UCE probe set using phyluce for taxa without a well‐annotated genome available 

      CONFLICT OF INTEREST  None declared.   AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS  G.T.G., A.A., and A.E.Z.S. conceived of the study. G.T.G. and A.A. conducted probe design and analyses. J.S.S., J.M.P., and D.R.M. obtained and provided the Illumina and Sanger sequence data, assembled the base genomes, and produced genomic assembly metrics. All authors contributed to writing of the manuscript.

  Supporting information     Click here for additional data file.       ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  This manuscript was greatly improved by the thoughtful review of Brant Faircloth and two anonymous reviewers. We thank the University of Kansas Center for Research Computing and the Biodiversity Institute for computational resources used during this project. GTG is supported by an NIH IRACDA postdoctoral fellowship (5K12GM063651). This project was funded in part by the Harold E. and Leona M. Rice Endowment Fund at Oregon State University.

  DATA AVAILABILITY  DNA sequences: GenBank MK838494 to MK838511; phyluce BED/BAM files for probe design experiments and Adephaga_2.9Kv1 final probe set fasta file: Dryad  https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.2f62927 ; Custom scripts: Alexander 2018a: Comparing_monolithic_UCE_fastas available from;  https://github.com/laninsky/comparing_monolithic_UCE_fastas ; Alexander 2018b: Phase_target available from  https://github.com/laninsky/reference_aligning_to_established_loci/tree/master/phase_target ; Alexander 2018c: distance_calcs available from:  https://github.com/laninsky/distance_calcs ; Alexander 2018d: Phase_everyone available from  https://github.com/laninsky/reference_aligning_to_established_loci/tree/master/phase_everyone . 

  REFERENCES  Alexander ,  A. M.  ,  Su ,  Y. C.  ,  Oliveros ,  C. H.  ,  Olson ,  K. V.  ,  Travers ,  S. L.  , &  Brown ,  R. M.  (  2017 ).  Genomic data reveals potential for hybridization, introgression, and incomplete lineage sorting to confound phylogenetic relationships in an adaptive radiation of narrow‐mouth frogs .  Evolution ,  71 (  2 ),  475 –  488 .  10.1111/evo.13133  27886369    Baca ,  S. M.  ,  Alexander ,  A.  ,  Gustafson ,  G. T.  , &  Short ,  A. E. Z.  (  2017 ).  Ultraconserved elements show utility in phylogenetic inference of Adephaga (Coleoptera) and suggest paraphyly of 'Hydradephaga' .  Systematic Entomology ,  42 (  4 ),  786 –  795 .  10.1111/syen.12244    Blaimer ,  B. B.  ,  Brady ,  S. G.  ,  Schultz ,  T. R.  ,  Lloyd ,  M. W.  ,  Fisher ,  B. L.  , &  Ward ,  P. S.  (  2015 ).  Phylogenomic methods outperform traditional multi‐locus approaches in resolving deep evolutionary history: A case study of formicine ants .  BMC Evolutionary Biology ,  15 ,  271  10.1186/s12862-015-0552-5  26637372    Blaimer ,  B. B.  ,  Lloyd ,  M. W.  ,  Guillory ,  W. X.  , &  Brady ,  S. G.  (  2016 ).  Sequence capture and phylogenetic utility of genomic ultraconserved elements obtained from pinned insect specimens .  PLoS ONE ,  11 ,  e0161531  10.1371/journal.pone.0161531  27556533    Branstetter ,  M. G.  ,  Longino ,  J. T.  ,  Ward ,  P. S.  , &  Faircloth ,  B. C.  (  2017 ).  Enriching the ant tree of life: Enhanced UCE bait set for genome‐scale phylogenetics of ants and other Hymenoptera .  Methods in Ecology and Evolution ,  8 ,  768 –  776 .  10.1111/2041-210X.12742    Bushnell ,  B.  (  2014 ).  BBTools software package . Retrieved from  http://sourceforge.net/projects/bbmap    Campana ,  M. G.  (  2018 ).  BaitsTools: Software for hybridization capture bait design .  Molecular Ecology Resources ,  18 (  2 ),  356 –  361 .  10.1111/1755-0998.12721  28941033    Castresana ,  J.  (  2000 ).  Selection of conserved blocks from multiple alignments for their use in phylogenetic analysis .  Molecular Biology and Evolution ,  17 ,  540 –  552 .  10.1093/oxfordjournals.molbev.a026334  10742046    Che ,  L. H.  ,  Zhang ,  S.‐Q.  ,  Li ,  Y.  ,  Liang ,  D.  ,  Pang ,  H.  ,  Ślipiński ,  A.  , &  Zhang ,  P.  (  2017 ).  Genome‐wide survey of nuclear protein‐coding markers for beetle phylogenetics and their application in resolving both deep and shallow‐level divergences .  Molecular Ecology Resources ,  17 (  6 ),  1342 –  1358 .  10.1111/1755-0998.12664  28258659    Chiari ,  Y.  ,  Cahais ,  V.  ,  Galtier ,  N.  , &  Delsuc ,  F.  (  2012 ).  Phylogenomic analyses support the position of turtles as sister group of birds and crocodiles (Archosauria) .  BMC Biology ,  10 ,  65 .  22839781    Core Team ,  R.  (  2017 ).  R: A language and environment for statistical computing .  Vienna, Austria :  R Foundation for Statistical Computing Retrieved from  http://www.R-project.org/    Crawford ,  N. G.  ,  Faircloth ,  B. C.  ,  McCormack ,  J. E.  ,  Brumfield ,  R. T.  ,  Winker ,  K.  , &  Glenn ,  T. C.  (  2012 ).  More than 1000 ultraconserved elements provide evidence that turtles are the sister group of archosaurs .  Biology Letters ,  8 (  5 ),  783 –  786 .  10.1098/rsbl.2012.0331  22593086    Cruz‐Dávalos ,  D. I.  ,  Llamas ,  B.  ,  Gaunitz ,  C.  ,  Fages ,  A.  ,  Gamba ,  C.  ,  Soubrier ,  J.  , …  Orlando ,  L.  (  2017 ).  Experimental conditions improving in‐solution target enrichment for ancient DNA .  Molecular Ecology Resources ,  17 (  3 ),  508 –  522 .  10.1111/1755-0998.12595  27566552    Dabney ,  J.  , &  Meyer ,  M.  (  2012 ).  Length and GC‐biases during sequencing library amplification: A comparison of various polymerase‐buffer systems with ancient and modern DNA sequencing libraries .  BioTechniques ,  52 ,  87 –  94 .  10.2144/000113809  22313406    Dowle ,  M.  , &  Srinivasan ,  A.  (  2017 ).  data.table: Extension of ‘data.frame’ . R package version 1.10.4. Retrieved from  https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=data.table    Esselstyn ,  J. A.  ,  Oliveros ,  C. H.  ,  Swanson ,  M. T.  , &  Faircloth ,  B. C.  (  2017 ).  Investigating difficult nodes in the placental mammal tree with expanded taxon sampling and thousands of ultraconserved loci .  Genome Biology and Evolution ,  9 (  9 ),  2308 –  2321 .  28934378    Faircloth ,  B. C.  (  2016 ).  PHYLUCE is a software package for the analysis of conserved genomic loci .  Bioinformatics ,  32 (  5 ),  786 –  788 .  10.1093/bioinformatics/btv646  26530724    Faircloth ,  B. C.  (  2017 ).  Identifying conserved genomic elements and designing universal bait sets to enrich them .  Methods in Ecology and Evolution ,  8 (  9 ),  1103 –  1112 .  10.1111/2041-210X.12754    Faircloth ,  B. C.  ,  Branstetter ,  M. G.  ,  White ,  N. D.  , &  Brady ,  S. G.  (  2015 ).  Target enrichment of ultraconserved elements from arthropods provides a genomic perspective on relationships among Hymenoptera .  Molecular Ecology Resources ,  15 (  3 ),  489 –  501 .  10.1111/1755-0998.12328  25207863    Faircloth ,  B. C.  ,  McCormack ,  J. E.  ,  Crawford ,  N. G.  ,  Harvey ,  M. G.  ,  Brumfield ,  R. T.  , &  Glenn ,  T. C.  (  2012 ).  Ultraconserved elements anchor thousands of genetic markers spanning multiple evolutionary timescales .  Systematic Biology ,  61 (  5 ),  717 –  726 .  10.1093/sysbio/sys004  22232343    Faircloth ,  B. C.  ,  Sorenson ,  L.  ,  Santini ,  F.  , &  Alfaro ,  M. E.  (  2013 ).  A phylogenomic perspective on the radiation of ray‐finned fishes based upon targeted sequencing of ultraconserved elements (UCEs) .  PLoS ONE ,  8 ,  e65923  10.1371/journal.pone.0065923  23824177    Forbes ,  A. A.  ,  Bagley ,  R. K.  ,  Beer ,  M. A.  ,  Hippee ,  A. C.  , &  Widmayer ,  H. A.  (  2018 ).  Quantifying the unquantifiable: Why Hymenoptera, not Coleoptera, is the most speciose animal order .  BMC Ecology ,  18 ,  21  10.1186/s12898-018-0176-x  30001194    Glenn ,  T. C.  , &  Faircloth ,  B. C.  (  2016 ).  Capturing Darwin's dream .  Molecular Ecology Resources ,  16 (  5 ),  1051 –  1058 .  10.1111/1755-0998.12574  27454358    Gomez ,  R. A.  ,  Will ,  K. W.  , &  Maddison ,  D. R.  (  2016 ).  Are Miquihuana rhadiniformis Barr, 1982 and  Pseudamara arenaria (LeConte, 1847) (Coleoptera, Carabidae) sphodrines? Phylogenetic analysis of data from next‐generation sequencing of museum specimens resolves the tribal‐group relationships of these enigmatic taxa  .  Entomologische Blätter Und Coleoptera ,  112 ,  149 –  168 .    Grismer ,  J. L.  ,  Schulte ,  J. A.  ,  Alexander ,  A.  ,  Wagner ,  P.  ,  Travers ,  S. L.  ,  Buehler ,  M. D.  , …  Brown ,  R. M.  (  2016 ).  The Eurasian invasion: Phylogenomic data reveal multiple Southeast Asian origins for Indian Dragon Lizards .  BMC Evolutionary Biology ,  16 (  1 ),  43  10.1186/s12862-016-0611-6  26896057    Gustafson ,  G. T.  ,  Prokin ,  A. A.  ,  Bukontaite ,  A.  ,  Bergsten ,  J.  , &  Miller ,  K. B.  (  2017 ).  Tip‐dated phylogeny of whirligig beetles reveals ancient lineage surviving on Madagascar .  Scientific Reports ,  7 ,  8619  10.1038/s41598-017-08403-1  28831048    Harris ,  R. S.  (  2007 ).  Improved pairwise alignment of genomic DNA . PhD thesis, Pennsylvania State University.    Hosner ,  P. A.  ,  Tobias ,  J. A.  ,  Braun ,  E. L.  , &  Kimball ,  R. T.  (  2017 ).  How do seemingly non‐vagile clades accomplish trans‐marine dispersal? Trait and dispersal evolution in the landfowl (Aves: Galliformes) .  Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences ,  284 (  1854 ),  20170210  10.1098/rspb.2017.0210    Johnson ,  M. G.  ,  Gardner ,  E. M.  ,  Liu ,  Y.  ,  Medina ,  R.  ,  Goffinet ,  B.  ,  Shaw ,  A. J.  , …  Wickett ,  N. J.  (  2016 ).  HybPiper: Extracting coding sequence and introns for phylogenetics from high‐throughput sequencing reads using target enrichment .  Applications in Plant Sciences ,  4 (  7 ),  1600016  10.3732/apps.1600016    Kanda ,  K.  ,  Pflug ,  J. M.  ,  Sproul ,  J. S.  ,  Dasenko ,  M. A.  , &  Maddison ,  D. R.  (  2015 ).  Successful recovery of nuclear protein‐coding genes from small insects in museums using illumina sequencing .  PLoS ONE ,  10 (  12 ),  e0143929  10.1371/journal.pone.0143929  26716693    Katoh ,  K.  , &  Standley ,  D. M.  (  2013 ).  MAFFT multiple sequence alignment software version 7: Improvements in performance and usability .  Molecular Biology and Evolution ,  30 (  4 ),  772 –  780 .  10.1093/molbev/mst010  23329690    Li ,  C.  ,  Hofreiter ,  M.  ,  Straube ,  N.  ,  Corrigan ,  S.  , &  Naylor ,  G. J.  (  2013 ).  Capturing protein‐coding genes across highly divergent species .  BioTechniques ,  54 ,  321 –  326 .  10.2144/000114039  23758502    Li ,  H.  , &  Durbin ,  R.  (  2009 ).  Fast and accurate short read alignment with Burrows‐Wheeler transform .  Bioinformatics ,  25 ,  1754 –  1760 .  10.1093/bioinformatics/btp324  19451168    Li ,  H.  , &  Durbin ,  R.  (  2010 ).  Fast and accurate long‐read alignment with Burrows‐Wheeler transform .  Bioinformatics ,  26 ,  589 –  595 .  10.1093/bioinformatics/btp698  20080505    Li ,  H.  ,  Handsaker ,  B.  ,  Wysoker ,  A.  ,  Fennell ,  T.  ,  Ruan ,  J.  ,  Homer ,  N.  , …  1000 Genome Project Data Processing Subgroup (  2009 ).  The sequence alignment/map (SAM) format and SAMtools .  Bioinformatics ,  25 ,  2078 –  2079 .  19505943    Lunter ,  G.  , &  Goodson ,  M.  (  2011 ).  Stampy: A statistical algorithm for sensitive and fast mapping of Illumina sequence reads .  Genome Research ,  21 ,  936 –  939 .  10.1101/gr.111120.110  20980556    Maddison ,  D. R.  (  2012 ).  Phylogeny of Bembidion and related ground beetles (Coleoptera: Carabidae: Trechinae: Bembidiini: Bembidiina)  .  Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution ,  63 ,  533 –  576 .  10.1016/j.ympev.2012.01.015  22421212    Maddison ,  D. R.  ,  Baker ,  M. D.  , &  Ober ,  K. A.  (  1999a ).  Phylogeny of carabid beetles as inferred from 18S ribosomal DNA (Coleoptera: Carabidae) .  Systematic Entomology ,  24 ,  103 –  138 .  10.1046/j.1365-3113.1999.00088.x    Maddison ,  D. R.  ,  Baker ,  M. D.  , &  Ober ,  K. A.  . (  1999b ).  A preliminary phylogenetic analysis of 18S ribosomal DNA of carabid beetles (Insecta: Coleoptera) In  Ball ,  G. E.  ,  Casale ,  A.  , &  Vigna‐Taglianti ,  A.  (Eds.),  Phylogeny and classification of Caraboidea (Coleoptera: Adephaga) , pp.  229 –  250 .  Torino, Italy :  Museo Regionale di Scienze Naturali, Atti . 517 p.    Maddison ,  D. R.  ,  Moore ,  W.  ,  Baker ,  M. D.  ,  Ellis ,  T. M.  ,  Ober ,  K. A.  ,  Cannone ,  J. J.  , &  Gutell ,  R. R.  (  2009 ).  Monophyly of terrestrial adephagan beetles as indicated by three nuclear genes (Coleoptera: Carabidae and Trachypachidae) .  Zoologica Scripta ,  38 (  1 ),  43 –  62 .  10.1111/j.1463-6409.2008.00359.x  19789725    Maddison ,  D. R.  , &  Swanson ,  A. P.  (  2010 ).  A preliminary characterization of Bembidion perspicuum LeConte, with a reclassification of related species (Coleoptera, Carabidae) north of México .  ZooKeys ,  43 ,  15 –  31 .  10.3897/zookeys.43.390    Mamanova ,  L.  ,  Coffey ,  A. J.  ,  Scott ,  C. E.  ,  Kozarewa ,  I.  ,  Turner ,  E. H.  ,  Kumar ,  A.  , …  Turner ,  D. J.  (  2010 ).  Target‐enrichment strategies for next‐generation sequencing .  Nature Methods ,  7 (  2 ),  111 –  118 .  10.1038/nmeth.1419  20111037    Manthey ,  J. D.  ,  Campillo ,  L. C.  ,  Burns ,  K. J.  , &  Moyle ,  R. G.  (  2016 ).  Comparison of target‐capture and restriction‐site associated DNA sequencing for phylogenomics: A test in cardinalid Tanagers (Aves, Genus: Piranga )  .  Systematic Biology ,  65 (  4 ),  640 –  650 .  26821912    Matveeva ,  O. V.  ,  Nechipurenko ,  Y. D.  ,  Riabenko ,  E.  ,  Ragan ,  C.  ,  Nazipova ,  N. N.  ,  Ogurtsov ,  A. Y.  , &  Shabalina ,  S. A.  (  2016 ).  Optimization of signal‐to‐noise ratio for efficient microarray probe design .  Bioinformatics ,  30 (  17 ),  i552 –  i558 .  10.1093/bioinformatics/btw451    Mayer ,  C.  ,  Sann ,  M.  ,  Donath ,  A.  ,  Meixner ,  M.  ,  Podsiadlowski ,  L.  ,  Peters ,  R. S.  , …  Niehuis ,  O.  (  2016 ).  BaitFisher: A software package for multispecies target DNA enrichment probe design .  Molecular Biology and Evolution ,  33 (  7 ),  1875 –  1886 .  10.1093/molbev/msw056  27009209    McCormack ,  J. E.  ,  Faircloth ,  B. C.  ,  Crawford ,  N. G.  ,  Gowaty ,  P. A.  ,  Brumfield ,  R. T.  , &  Glenn ,  T. C.  (  2012 ).  Ultraconserved elements are novel phylogenomic markers that resolved placental mammal phylogeny when combined with species‐tree analysis .  Genome Research ,  22 (  4 ),  746 –  754 .  22207614    McCormack ,  J. E.  ,  Harvey ,  M. G.  ,  Faircloth ,  B. C.  ,  Crawford ,  N. G.  ,  Glenn ,  T. C.  , &  Brumfield ,  R. T.  (  2013 ).  A phylogeny of birds based on over 1,500 loci collected by target enrichment and high‐throughput sequencing .  PLoS ONE ,  8 ,  e54848  10.1371/journal.pone.0054848  23382987    McCormack ,  J. E.  ,  Hird ,  S. M.  ,  Zellmer ,  A. J.  ,  Carstens ,  B. C.  , &  Brumfield ,  R. T.  (  2013 ).  Applications of next‐generation sequencing to phylogeography and phylogenetics .  Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution ,  66 (  2 ),  526 –  538 .  10.1016/j.ympev.2011.12.007  22197804    McCormack ,  J. E.  ,  Tsai ,  W. L.  , &  Faircloth ,  B. C.  (  2016 ).  Sequence capture of ultraconserved elements from bird museum specimens .  Molecular Ecology Resources ,  16 (  5 ),  1189 –  1203 .  10.1111/1755-0998.12466  26391430    McKenna ,  A.  ,  Hanna ,  M.  ,  Banks ,  E.  ,  Sivachenko ,  A.  ,  Cibulskis ,  K.  ,  Kernytsky ,  A.  , …  DePristo ,  M. A.  (  2010 ).  The Genome Analysis Toolkit: A MapReduce framework for analyzing next‐generation DNA sequencing data .  Genome Resources ,  20 (  9 ),  1297 –  1303 .  10.1101/gr.107524.110    McKenna ,  D. D.  ,  Wild ,  A. L.  ,  Kanda ,  K.  ,  Bellamy ,  C. L.  ,  Beutel ,  R. G.  ,  Caterino ,  M. S.  , …  Farrell ,  B. D.  (  2015 ).  The beetle tree of life reveals that Coleoptera survived end‐Permian mass extinction to diversify during the Cretaceous terrestrial revolution .  Systematic Entomology ,  40 ,  835 –  880 .  10.1111/syen.12132    Musher ,  L. J.  , &  Cracraft ,  J.  (  2018 ).  Phylogenomics and species delimitation of a complex radiation of Neotropical suboscine birds ( Pachyramphus )  .  Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution ,  118 ,  204 –  221 .  10.1016/j.ympev.2017.09.013  28951253    Nguyen ,  L.‐T.  ,  Schmidt ,  H. A.  ,  von Haeseler ,  A.  , &  Minh ,  B. Q.  (  2015 ).  IQ‐TREE: A fast and effective stochastic algorithm for estimating maximum likelihood phylogenies .  Molecular Biology and Evolution ,  32 (  1 ),  268 –  274 .  10.1093/molbev/msu300  25371430    Ober ,  K.  (  2002 ).  Phylogenetic relationships of the carabid subfamily Harpalinae (Coleoptera) based on molecular sequence data .  Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution ,  24 ,  228 –  248 .  10.1016/S1055-7903(02)00251-8  12144759    Paijmans ,  J. L. A.  ,  Fickel ,  J.  ,  Courtiol ,  A.  ,  Hofreiter ,  M.  , &  Förster ,  D. W.  (  2016 ).  Impact of enrichment conditions on cross‐species capture of fresh and degraded DNA .  Molecular Ecology Resources ,  16 (  1 ),  42 –  55 .  10.1111/1755-0998.12420  25925277    Quattrini ,  A. M.  ,  Faircloth ,  B. C.  ,  Dueñas ,  L. F.  ,  Bridge ,  T. C. L.  ,  Brugler ,  M. R.  ,  Calixto‐Botía ,  I. F.  , …  McFadden ,  C. S.  (  2018 ).  Universal target‐enrichment baits for anthozoan (Cnidaria) phylogenomics: New approaches to long‐standing problems .  Molecular Ecology Resources ,  18 (  2 ),  281 –  295 .  10.1111/1755-0998.12736  29131534    Rice ,  P.  ,  Longden ,  I.  , &  Bleasby ,  A.  (  2000 ).  EMBOSS: The European molecular biology open software suite .  Trends in Genetics ,  16 (  6 ),  276 –  277 .  10.1016/S0168-9525(00)02024-2  10827456    Ruane ,  S.  , &  Austin ,  C. C.  (  2017 ).  Phylogenomics using formalin‐fixed and 100+ year‐old intractable natural history specimens .  Molecular Ecology Resources ,  17 (  5 ),  1003 –  1008 .  10.1111/1755-0998.12655  28118515    Shen ,  X.‐X.  ,  Liang ,  D.  ,  Wen ,  J.‐Z.  , &  Zhang ,  P.  (  2011 ).  Multiple genome alignments facilitate development of NPCL markers: A case study of tetrapod phylogeny focusing on the position of turtles .  Molecular Biology and Evolution ,  28 (  12 ),  3237 –  3252 .  10.1093/molbev/msr148  21680872    Short ,  A. E. Z.  (  2018 ).  Systematics of aquatic beetles (Coleoptera): Current state and future directions .  Systematic Entomology ,  43 ,  6933 –  18 .  10.1111/syen.12270    Simão ,  F. A.  ,  Waterhouse ,  R. M.  ,  Ioannidis ,  P.  ,  Kriventseva ,  E. V.  , &  Zdobnov ,  E. M.  (  2015 ).  BUSCO: Assessing genome assembly and annotation completeness with single‐copy orthologs .  Bioinformatics ,  31 (  19 ),  3210 –  3212 .  10.1093/bioinformatics/btv351  26059717    Ślipiński ,  A.  ,  Leschen ,  R. A. B.  , &  Lawrence ,  J. F.  (  2011 ).  Order Coleoptera Linnaeus, 1758. Animal biodiversity: An outline of higher‐level classification and survey of taxonomic richness (ed. By Z.‐Q. Zhang) .  Zootaxa ,  3148 ,  203 –  208 .    Smith ,  B. T.  ,  Harvey ,  M. G.  ,  Faircloth ,  B. C.  ,  Glenn ,  T. C.  , &  Brumfield ,  R. T.  (  2014 ).  Target capture and massively parallel sequencing of ultraconserved elements for comparative studies at shallow evolutionary time scales .  Systematic Biology ,  63 (  1 ),  83 –  95 .  10.1093/sysbio/syt061  24021724    Sproul ,  J. S.  , &  Maddison ,  D. R.  (  2017 ).  Sequencing historical specimens: Successful preparation of small specimens with low amounts of degraded DNA .  Molecular Ecology Resources ,  17 ,  1183 –  1201 .  10.1111/1755-0998.12660  28199781    Stamatakis ,  A.  (  2014 ).  RAxML version 8: A tool for phylogenetic analysis and post‐analysis of large phylogenies .  Bioinformatics ,  30 (  9 ),  1312 –  1313 .  10.1093/bioinformatics/btu033  24451623    Starrett ,  J.  ,  Derkarabetian ,  S.  ,  Hedin ,  M.  ,  Byrson ,  R. W.  Jr  ,  McCormack ,  J.  , &  Fairclotch ,  B. C.  (  2017 ).  High phylogenetic utility of an ultraconserved element probe set designed for Arachnida .  Molecular Ecology Resources ,  17 (  4 ),  812 –  823 .  10.1111/1755-0998.12621  27768256    Streicher ,  J. W.  ,  Miller ,  E. C.  ,  Guerrero ,  P. C.  ,  Correa ,  C.  ,  Ortiz ,  J. C.  ,  Crawford ,  A. J.  , …  Wiens ,  J. J.  (  2018 ).  Evaluating methods for phylogenomic analyses, and a new phylogeny for a major frog clade (Hyloidea) based on 2214 loci .  Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution ,  119 ,  128 –  143 .  10.1016/j.ympev.2017.10.013  29111477    Streicher ,  J. W.  , &  Wiens ,  J. J.  (  2017 ).  Phylogenomic analyses of more than 4000 nuclear loci resolve the origin of snakes among lizard families .  Biology Letters ,  13 (  9 ),  20170393  10.1098/rsbl.2017.0393  28904179    Sun ,  K.  ,  Meiklejohn ,  K. A.  ,  Faircloth ,  B. C.  ,  Glenn ,  T. C.  ,  Braun ,  E. L.  , &  Kimball ,  R. T.  (  2014 ).  The evolution of peafowl and other taxa with ocelli (eyespots): A phylogenomic approach .  Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences ,  281 ,  20140823  10.1098/rspb.2014.0823    Talavera ,  G.  , &  Castresana ,  J.  (  2007 ).  Improvement of phylogenies after removing divergent and ambiguously aligned blocks from protein sequence alignments .  Systematic Biology ,  56 ,  564 –  577 .  10.1080/10635150701472164  17654362    Tewhey ,  R.  ,  Nakano ,  M.  ,  Wang ,  X.  ,  Pabón‐Peña ,  C.  ,  Novak ,  B.  ,  Giuffre ,  A.  , …  Frazer ,  K. A.  (  2009 ).  Enrichment of sequencing targets from the human genome by solution hybridization .  Genome Biology ,  10 ,  R116  10.1186/gb-2009-10-10-r116  19835619    Toussaint ,  E. F. A.  ,  Seidel ,  M.  ,  Arriaga‐Varela ,  E.  ,  Hájek ,  J.  ,  Král ,  D.  ,  Sekerka ,  L.  , …  Fikáček ,  M.  (  2017 ).  The peril of dating beetles .  Systematic Entomology ,  42 (  1 ),  6933 –  10 .  10.1111/syen.12198    Van Dam ,  M. H.  ,  Lam ,  A. W.  ,  Sagata ,  K.  ,  Gewa ,  B.  ,  Laufa ,  R.  ,  Balke ,  M.  , …  Reidel ,  A.  (  2017 ).  Ultraconserved elements (UCEs) resolve the phylogeny of Australasian smurf‐weevils .  PLoS ONE ,  12 ,  e0188044 .  29166661    Wickham ,  H.  (  2017 ).  stringr: Simple, consistent wrappers for common string operations . R package version 1.2.0. Retrieved from  http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=stringr    Zhang ,  S.‐Q.  ,  Che ,  L.‐H.  ,  Li ,  Y.  ,  Liang ,  D.  ,  Pang ,  H.  ,  Ślipiński ,  A.  , &  Zhang ,  P.  (  2018 ).  Evolutionary history of Coleoptera revealed by extensive sampling of genes and species .  Nature Communications ,  9 ,  205  10.1038/s41467-017-02644-4     

