Anais da Academia Brasileira de Ciências (2019) 91(Suppl. 3): e20180768 
(Annals of the Brazilian Academy of Sciences)
Printed version ISSN 0001-3765 / Online version ISSN 1678-2690
http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/0001-3765201920180768
www.scielo.br/aabc  |  www.fb.com/aabcjournal
An Acad Bras Cienc (2019) 91(Suppl. 3)
Biological Sciences
The study of biotic interactions in the Brazilian Cerrado 
as a path to the conservation of biodiversity
KLEBER DEL-CLARO and HELENA MAURA TOREZAN-SILINGARDI
Laboratório de Ecologia Comportamental e de Interações/LECI, Instituto de Biologia, Universidade 
Federal de Uberlândia, Rua Ceará, s/n, Umuarama, 38400-902 Uberlândia, MG, Brazil
Manuscript received on January 25, 2019; accepted for publication on July 27, 2019
How to cite: DEL-CLARO K AND TOREZAN-SILINGARDI HM. 2019. The study of biotic interactions 
in the Brazilian Cerrado as a path to the conservation of biodiversity. An Acad Bras Cienc 91: e20180769. DOI 
DOI 10.1590/0001-3765201920180768.
Abstract: As a focus for conservation efforts, biodiversity has received increased attention in the last 
fifty years. Searching for patterns in biodiversity, researchers have suggested studies including: ecological 
communities, cladistics classifications, hierarchical compositions of different levels of organization, and 
groups of taxonomically related species. Here, we propose that the study of the biodiversity of interactions 
may present a new perspective in the efforts to conserve biodiversity, especially in endangered ecosystems 
like the tropical savannas. We suggest that Cerrado, like other tropical savannas, is a particularly important 
ecosystem in which we can direct efforts to explain what determines the major part of variation in the 
outcomes of species interactions. 
Key words: ant-plant interactions, ecosystem, tropical savanna, Veredas.
Correspondence to: Kleber Del-Claro 
E-mail: delclaro@ufu.br 
ORCid: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8886-9568
In tropical South America, the savanna covers about 
2 million km2, an area similar to the one occupied 
by the Western Europe. In Brazil this vegetation 
is commonly named “Cerrado” and represented 
ca. 22% of the Brazilian land surface, being the 
second largest biome in the country. It extends 
from the southern borders of the Amazonian forest 
to outlying areas in the southern states of São Paulo 
and Paraná. The distribution of the cerrado biome is 
highly coincident with the plateau of central Brazil, 
which divides three of the largest South American 
water basins: those of the Amazon, Plate/Paraguay, 
and São Francisco rivers (see Oliveira-Filho and 
Ratter 2002). The Brazilian savanna or Cerrado is 
the most diverse tropical savanna, and its landscape 
presents also great variation with several vegetation 
physiognomies, from open areas with large fields 
(Figure 1a) up to a close and dry forest with trees 
reaching 10 to 12 m tall, the “Cerradão” (Figure 
1b); the Cerrado sensu stricto (Figure 1c) composed 
mainly by shrubs and small tress; and “Veredas” 
(Figure 1d) or the palm tree wetlands (Oliveira-
Filho and Ratter 2002). However, Cerrado is 
considered a hot-spot for biodiversity preservation, 
as it has lots of endemic species and its area is 
decreasing very fast due to human activities that 
result in soil occupation. Nowadays only 8% of 
original Cerrado area is still preserved. Despite 
this importance in area and diversity, research on 
cerrado is mainly driven to exploit new manners of 
use, especially for agriculture, livestock or pasture. 
KLEBER DEL-CLARO AND HELENA MAURA TOREZAN-SILINGARDI	
THE IMPORTANCE OF CERRADO CONSERVATION
An Acad Bras Cienc (2019) 91(Suppl. 3)	
e20180768  2 | 6 
Studies on biodiversity represent less than 10% of 
the total (Oliveira and Marquis 2002, Del-Claro 
et al. 2018), even with an expressive increase in 
numbers of papers published in ecology, botany 
and zoology in recent years.
As a focus for conservation efforts, 
biodiversity has received increased attention in the 
last decades of the past century (Pearson 1994), 
and continues to increase. Searching for patterns 
in biodiversity, researchers have suggested various 
units of study including: ecological communities, 
cladistics classifications, hierarchical composite 
of different levels of organization, and groups of 
taxonomically related species (Del-Claro et al. 
2018). The majority of programs for conservation 
of natural systems have been concerned primarily 
with the maintenance of species diversity, 
ecosystem function, and the preservation of 
Figure 1 - The most common physiognomies of the Brazilian tropical savannas: a – Open cerrado – opened areas of 
large fields, in some cases acting as an ecotone between cerrado and veredas; b – The cerradão, dry forest – tall trees in 
areas of more compacted soil; c – The cerrado sensu stricto – shrubs and small tress in a sand soil area; d – The veredas 
or palm tree wetlands – in the lower parts of landscape, occurs in high humidity and clay soil.
KLEBER DEL-CLARO AND HELENA MAURA TOREZAN-SILINGARDI	
THE IMPORTANCE OF CERRADO CONSERVATION
An Acad Bras Cienc (2019) 91(Suppl. 3)	
e20180768  3 | 6 
genetic variation within populations (Thompson 
2013). Thus a broader view of biodiversity has 
prevailed. These guidelines have been followed 
by researchers in the study of Brazil main biomes 
like Atlantic Forest, Amazonia and also Cerrado 
(e. g. Oliveira and Marquis 2002, Gottsberger 
and Silberbauer-Gottsberger 2006, Fagundes et 
al. 2016). However, in a more recent and realistic 
perspective, biodiversity should be viewed and 
evaluated in ways that also embraces the extreme 
richness inherent in biotic interactions, including 
not only trophic relationships, but also aspects 
of life histories, biology and behavior of related 
species (Del-Claro et al. 2013, 2016, 2018). 
Despite ubiquitous, the outcomes of each 
interaction vary depending on physical and biotic 
changes in the environment. Thus, there is no 
mutualism, for example, that will be ever and 
unconditionally a mutualism (Figure 2). Same 
parasitic or predatory relationships will change 
over evolutionary time modifying the results of the 
interactions (see Del-Claro and Torezan-Silingardi, 
2012, for a review). For example, bees commonly 
act as pollinators of many plant species. Several 
of these plant species in Cerrado vegetation also 
possess extrafloral nectaries (EFNs), glands located 
outside flowers, in leaves, brackens and stems that 
attract ants to feed on its sugar rich nectar (Figure 
2), that in counterpart protect the plants against 
natural enemies (Del-Claro et al. 2016, 2018). But 
ants can also visit flowers and ant visitation on 
flowers might be detrimental to plant reproduction, 
especially because pollinators might be deterred, 
expelled, and/or preyed upon by flower-visiting 
ants (Assunção et al. 2014). In a manipulative field 
experiment, Assunção et al. (2014) showed that just 
the ant shape and color on a flower can significantly 
reduce the visit of pollinators, leading to a dramatic 
indirect cost of a mutualism. The central tendency 
in ecological studies to explain these variations in 
the outcomes of biotic interactions is to suppose 
that the majority of meaningful functional diversity 
occurs at the level of the species and intraspecific 
variation is commonly ignored, including the major 
part of studies in this line performed in Cerrado 
vegetation (Del-Claro and Torezan-Silingardi 2012, 
Thompson 2013). Nevertheless, individuals are 
rarely identical and behavioral ecology, for example, 
has showed that consistent individual differences in 
personality and/or temperament may alter the roles 
that individuals play within populations and possibly 
communities (e.g. Filgueiras et al. 2018, Moura et 
al. 2018). Thus, the knowledge of individual aspects 
(including genetic variation) and natural history are 
fundamental to the study of biodiversity. We strongly 
recommend this type of guideline to future studies in 
cerrado ecosystem that intend to build the basis to its 
conservancy.
In this still new and promising pathway 
to really understand the mechanisms involved 
in our amazing biodiversity dawn the studies of 
ecological networks (Dáttilo and Rico-Gray 2018), 
studies that have used tools derived from graph 
theory to investigate the organization of ecological 
interactions in different ecosystems around the world. 
In this sense, to add ecological networks studies 
to our knowledge about aspects of life histories, 
biology and behavior of related species, we need 
to search for useful tools and biological systems, to 
achieve success in a so complex scientific field. In 
the Cerrados, the advances have been made using 
background models, as ant-plant interactions. The 
variation in the outcomes of mutualism between 
ants and EFN-bearing plants is widely recognized 
(see Rico-Gray and Oliveira 2007). In ant–EFN 
plant interactions, from one community to others, 
the same plant species presents variation in internal 
(i.e. nutrition, phenology, nectar production and 
quality) and external factors (i.e. variations in 
meteorological and soil conditions) that direct 
influence the outcomes of each interaction (see Del-
Claro et al. 2016). Thus so, to Cerrado vegetation 
where these interactions are very common, an 
important future direction is to evaluate the role of 
KLEBER DEL-CLARO AND HELENA MAURA TOREZAN-SILINGARDI	
THE IMPORTANCE OF CERRADO CONSERVATION
An Acad Bras Cienc (2019) 91(Suppl. 3)	
e20180768  4 | 6 
each partner within the multitrophic networks, in 
order to understand the ecological and evolutionary 
dynamics of interactive communities, usually rich 
in species and interactions. Are these systems 
results of coevolutionary process? May ant-plant 
systems in Cerrados shape a study model applied 
to other ecosystems where we intend to understand 
the communities’ dynamic? 
We suggest that Cerrado, like other tropical 
savannas, is a particularly important ecosystem 
in which we can direct efforts to explain what 
determines the major part of variation in the 
Figure 2 - Ants feed on different plant resources and extrafloral nectar (EFN) is the most common. Plant produces this 
secretion rich in water, sugar (fructose and sucrose), amino acids, and other substances in small quantities that attract 
ants that climb onto the plants and protected them against natural enemies, like herbivores (a – Neoponera villosa 
feeding on EFN in Inga vera, Leguminosae). This relationship is named mutualism, where both organisms benefit each 
other. However, these ants also need protein (the reason they protect the plants) and walk by all plant parts searching 
for animal food, including the inflorescences (b). But, plants need pollination to reproduce, what is related to other 
visitors like bees (c – Trigiona sp). When ants casually find pollinators, they represent food, and the ants will attack 
then (d – Ectatomma tuberculatum preying on a Trigona asp), now prejudicing the plant reproduction. It represents an 
unexpected effect of a mutual interaction.
KLEBER DEL-CLARO AND HELENA MAURA TOREZAN-SILINGARDI	
THE IMPORTANCE OF CERRADO CONSERVATION
An Acad Bras Cienc (2019) 91(Suppl. 3)	
e20180768  5 | 6 
outcomes of species interactions. Could it be 
species identity, phenological variation over time, 
climatic changes, coevolution, or a combination of 
factors? 
Climatic parameters are able to influence 
the timing of phenological events, affecting 
the degree of synchrony among plant species, 
their interactions, and reproductive success. In 
a world in quickly climatic change, integrating 
phenological investigations in the field with the 
existing theories and mathematical modeling may 
allow us to describe the possible maintenance and 
evolution of life histories in response to climate 
change. The Cerrados are an appropriate ecosystem 
to test and observe these important aspects to the 
biodiversity preservation. Recently, Vilela et al. 
(2018) working in the Cerrados of central Brazil, in 
Minas Gerais state, verified variations in climatic 
factors (temperature and precipitation) over a 
period of 10 years (2005–2014) and correlated 
them with the onset of flowering of four plant 
species. These authors also tested whether the 
observed phenological synchronization among 
species changed over time, affecting the herbivory 
and fruit set. With the field work background Vilela 
et al. (2018) developed a mathematical model to 
estimate the flower and fruit production in response 
to phenological changes for 5 years. In short, these 
authors integrated phenological investigations, 
ecological interactions among plants and animals 
in the Brazilian savanna with the existing theories 
and mathematical modeling. That allowed us to 
interpret different phenological synchronization 
degrees and enable us to describe the possible 
maintenance and evolution of life histories in 
response to climate change. This is an enormous 
and initial step to establish a plan to recover and 
preserve this endangered ecosystem.  
The Cerrado, despite being an amazing, 
enormous, and very diverse ecosystem, where 
the development of the studies of biodiversity 
of interactions may open a window to the 
comprehension of the same processes in other 
biomes, is also an area which divides three of the 
largest South American water basins: those of the 
Amazon, Plate/Paraguay, and São Francisco rivers 
(see Oliveira-Filho and Ratter 2002). The major 
part of river sources of these basins is in the Veredas 
of Triângulo Mineiro, at Minas Gerais state. Thus, 
the Cerrado is not only a hot spot of biodiversity, 
but also a hot spot to water preservation in Central 
South America. Any effort to the real preservation 
of world biodiversity must consider the Cerrado.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Adalberto Luís Val and Vivaldo Mora Neto 
for reviews and comments in the original version of 
the manuscript. We also thank the Brazilian and 
French Academies of Science for the invitation 
for to participate in the Biodiversity Symposium. 
The authors thank to Conselho Nacional de 
Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq) 
and Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de 
Minas Gerais (Fapemig) for financial support.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Both authors contributed in all parts of the 
manuscript, since the development of the idea, 
composition of figures, writing and conclusions, 
equally.
REFERENCES
ASSUNÇÃO MA, TOREZAN-SILINGARDI HM AND 
DEL-CLARO K. 2014. Do ant visitors to extrafloral 
nectaries of plants repel pollinators and cause an indirect 
cost of mutualism? Flora 2: 244-249. 
DÁTTILO W AND RICO-GRAY V. 2018. Ecological 
Networks in the Tropics: An Integrative Overview of 
Species Interactions from Some of the Most Species-Rich 
Habitats on Earth. ISBN: 978-3-319-68227-3. Springer, 
201 p.
DEL-CLARO K AND TOREZAN-SILINGARDI HM. 2012. 
Ecologia das Interações Plantas-Animais: Uma Abordagem 
Ecológico-Evolutiva. Rio de Janeiro: Technical Books, 
333 p.
KLEBER DEL-CLARO AND HELENA MAURA TOREZAN-SILINGARDI	
THE IMPORTANCE OF CERRADO CONSERVATION
An Acad Bras Cienc (2019) 91(Suppl. 3)	
e20180768  6 | 6 
DEL-CLARO K, STEFANI V, LANGE D, VILELA 
AA, NAHAS L, VELASQUES M AND TOREZAN-
SILINGARDI HM. 2013. The importance of natural 
history studies for a better comprehension of animal-plant 
interactions networks. Bioscence J 29: 439-448.
DEL-CLARO K, RICO-GRAY V, TOREZAN-
SILINGARDI HM, ALVES-SILVA E, FAGUNDES 
R, LANGE D, DÁTILLO W, VILELA AA, AGUIRRE 
A AND RODRIGUEZ-MORALES D. 2016. Loss and 
gains in ant–plant interactions mediated by extrafloral 
nectar: Fidelity, cheats, and lies. Insectes Soc 63: 207-221.
DEL-CLARO K, LANGE D, TOREZAN-SILINGARDI 
HM, ANJOS DV, CALIXTO ES, DÁTTILO W 
AND RICO-GRAY V. 2018. The Complex Ant-Plant 
Relationship Within Tropical Ecological Networks In: 
Ecological Networks in the Tropics. 1st ed., Dáttilo W and 
Rico-Gray V (Eds), Springer International Publishing, v.1, 
p. 59-71.
FAGUNDES R, DÁTTILO W, RIBEIRO SP, RICO-GRAY 
V AND DEL-CLARO K. 2016. Food source availability 
and interspecific dominance as structural mechanisms of 
ant-plant-hemipteran multitrophic networks. Arthropod 
Plant Interact 10(3): 207-220.
FILGUEIRAS RR, GOMES FCC, TIZO A, DEL-CLARO 
K AND TIZO-PEDROSO E. 2018. Cooperative foraging 
in neotropical pseudoscorpions: effects of prey changes 
on behavioral adjustments of colonies. Actha Ethologica 
2018: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10211-018-0294-7.
G O T T S B E R G E R  
G  A N D  
S I L B E R B A U E R -
GOTTSBERGER I. 2006. Life in the Cerrado: a South 
American Tropical Seasonal Ecosystem. Vol. I. Origin, 
Structure, Dynamics and Plant Use. - Reta, Ulm, 277 p.
MOURA RF, TIZO-PEDROSO E AND DEL-CLARO K. 
2018. Colony size, habitat structure, and prey size shape 
the predation ecology of a social pseudoscorpion from a 
tropical savanna. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology, 
v.72, p. 103. 
OLIVEIRA-FILHO AT AND RATTER JA. 2002. 
Vegetation physiognomies and woody flora of the cerrado 
biome, p. 91-120. In: Oliveira PS and Marquis RJ (Eds), 
The cerrados of Brazil: ecology and natural history of a 
neotropical savanna. Columbia University Press, New 
York, 398 p.
OLIVEIRA PS AND MARQUIS RJ. 2002. The cerrados 
of Brazil: Ecology and natural history of   Neotropical 
savanna. Columbia University Press, New York, 398 p.
PEARSON DL. 1994. Selecting indicator taxa for the 
quantitative assessment of biodiversity. Philos Trans R Soc 
Lond B Biol Sci 345: 75-79.
RICO-GRAY V AND OLIVEIRA PS. 2007. The ecology 
and evolution of ant–plant interactions. The University of 
Chicago Press, Chicago.
THOMPSON JN. 2013. Relentless Evolution. University of 
Chicago Press, Chicago.
VILELA AA, DEL CLARO VTS, TOREZAN-
SILINGARDI HM AND DEL-CLARO K. 2018. 
Arthropod-Plant Interactions 12: 215-227. 
