Assessing the variability in the relationship between the particulate backscattering coefficient and the chlorophyll a concentration from a global Biogeochemical-Argo database  European Union   European Commission   GMMC)   LEFE Cyber   British Natural Environment Research Council -NERC   CNES-TOSCA   Agence Nationale de la Recherche   Italian Ministry of Education, University and Research -MIUR)   European Research Council   Argo-Italy          Marie  Barbieux   barbieux@obs-vlfr.fr  -Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, CNRS, Observatoire Océanologique de Villefranche (OOV), Laboratoire d'Océanographie de Villefranche (LOV), 181 Chemin du Lazaret, 06 230 Villefranche-sur-Mer, France.  Sorbonne Universités  Observatoire Océanologique de Villefranche (OOV)  Laboratoire d'Océanographie de Villefranche (LOV)  UPMC Univ Paris 06  CNRS  181 Chemin du Lazaret, 06 230  Villefranche-sur-Mer  France     Julia  Uitz   -Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, CNRS, Observatoire Océanologique de Villefranche (OOV), Laboratoire d'Océanographie de Villefranche (LOV), 181 Chemin du Lazaret, 06 230 Villefranche-sur-Mer, France.  Sorbonne Universités  Observatoire Océanologique de Villefranche (OOV)  Laboratoire d'Océanographie de Villefranche (LOV)  UPMC Univ Paris 06  CNRS  181 Chemin du Lazaret, 06 230  Villefranche-sur-Mer  France     Annick  Bricaud   -Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, CNRS, Observatoire Océanologique de Villefranche (OOV), Laboratoire d'Océanographie de Villefranche (LOV), 181 Chemin du Lazaret, 06 230 Villefranche-sur-Mer, France.  Sorbonne Universités  Observatoire Océanologique de Villefranche (OOV)  Laboratoire d'Océanographie de Villefranche (LOV)  UPMC Univ Paris 06  CNRS  181 Chemin du Lazaret, 06 230  Villefranche-sur-Mer  France     Emanuele  Organelli   -Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, CNRS, Observatoire Océanologique de Villefranche (OOV), Laboratoire d'Océanographie de Villefranche (LOV), 181 Chemin du Lazaret, 06 230 Villefranche-sur-Mer, France.  Sorbonne Universités  Observatoire Océanologique de Villefranche (OOV)  Laboratoire d'Océanographie de Villefranche (LOV)  UPMC Univ Paris 06  CNRS  181 Chemin du Lazaret, 06 230  Villefranche-sur-Mer  France    -Plymouth Marine Laboratory, Prospect Place, The Hoe, PL1 3DH Plymouth, United Kingdom.  Plymouth Marine Laboratory  Prospect Place, The Hoe  PL1 3DH  Plymouth  United Kingdom     Antoine  Poteau   -Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, CNRS, Observatoire Océanologique de Villefranche (OOV), Laboratoire d'Océanographie de Villefranche (LOV), 181 Chemin du Lazaret, 06 230 Villefranche-sur-Mer, France.  Sorbonne Universités  Observatoire Océanologique de Villefranche (OOV)  Laboratoire d'Océanographie de Villefranche (LOV)  UPMC Univ Paris 06  CNRS  181 Chemin du Lazaret, 06 230  Villefranche-sur-Mer  France     Catherine  Schmechtig   -OSU Ecce Terra, UMS 3455, CNRS and Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris 6, 4 place Jussieu 75252 Paris cedex 05, France  OSU Ecce Terra  UMS 3455  CNRS  Université Pierre et Marie Curie  Paris 6, 4 place Jussieu  75252, cedex 05  Paris  France     Bernard  Gentili   -Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, CNRS, Observatoire Océanologique de Villefranche (OOV), Laboratoire d'Océanographie de Villefranche (LOV), 181 Chemin du Lazaret, 06 230 Villefranche-sur-Mer, France.  Sorbonne Universités  Observatoire Océanologique de Villefranche (OOV)  Laboratoire d'Océanographie de Villefranche (LOV)  UPMC Univ Paris 06  CNRS  181 Chemin du Lazaret, 06 230  Villefranche-sur-Mer  France     Christophe  Penkerc'h   -Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, CNRS, Observatoire Océanologique de Villefranche (OOV), Laboratoire d'Océanographie de Villefranche (LOV), 181 Chemin du Lazaret, 06 230 Villefranche-sur-Mer, France.  Sorbonne Universités  Observatoire Océanologique de Villefranche (OOV)  Laboratoire d'Océanographie de Villefranche (LOV)  UPMC Univ Paris 06  CNRS  181 Chemin du Lazaret, 06 230  Villefranche-sur-Mer  France     Edouard  Leymarie   -Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, CNRS, Observatoire Océanologique de Villefranche (OOV), Laboratoire d'Océanographie de Villefranche (LOV), 181 Chemin du Lazaret, 06 230 Villefranche-sur-Mer, France.  Sorbonne Universités  Observatoire Océanologique de Villefranche (OOV)  Laboratoire d'Océanographie de Villefranche (LOV)  UPMC Univ Paris 06  CNRS  181 Chemin du Lazaret, 06 230  Villefranche-sur-Mer  France     Fabrizio D'ortenzio   -Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, CNRS, Observatoire Océanologique de Villefranche (OOV), Laboratoire d'Océanographie de Villefranche (LOV), 181 Chemin du Lazaret, 06 230 Villefranche-sur-Mer, France.  Sorbonne Universités  Observatoire Océanologique de Villefranche (OOV)  Laboratoire d'Océanographie de Villefranche (LOV)  UPMC Univ Paris 06  CNRS  181 Chemin du Lazaret, 06 230  Villefranche-sur-Mer  France     Hervé  Claustre   -Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, CNRS, Observatoire Océanologique de Villefranche (OOV), Laboratoire d'Océanographie de Villefranche (LOV), 181 Chemin du Lazaret, 06 230 Villefranche-sur-Mer, France.  Sorbonne Universités  Observatoire Océanologique de Villefranche (OOV)  Laboratoire d'Océanographie de Villefranche (LOV)  UPMC Univ Paris 06  CNRS  181 Chemin du Lazaret, 06 230  Villefranche-sur-Mer  France     Assessing the variability in the relationship between the particulate backscattering coefficient and the chlorophyll a concentration from a global Biogeochemical-Argo database       AC20912767141CFB68EBF1B3F0A47742     GROBID - A machine learning software for extracting information from scholarly documents       Particle backscattering  BGC-Argo profiling floats  optical properties  phytoplankton biomass  world's oceans    The particulate backscattering coefficient vs chlorophyll a concentration relationship varies along the water column, according to seasons and oceanic regions. 

 -The b bp -to-Chla ratio is a valuable biogeochemical proxy for assessing the nature of the particulate assemblage and revealing photoacclimation processes. 

 -The BGC-Argo float network yields an unprecedented amount of quality data for studying biogeochemical processes at a global scale and along the vertical dimension. 



    INTRODUCTION Our ability to observe the dynamics of phytoplankton biomass and associated carbon fluxes on relevant space and time scales considerably limits our understanding and prediction skills of the biogeochemical role of phytoplankton in the carbon biological pump (Volk and Hoffert, 1985;  Honjo et al., 2014;  Legendre et al., 2015) .   For example, in situ measurements of primary production and phytoplankton carbon biomass are particularly challenging and remain scarce, although novel promising techniques have been recently proposed (Riser and Johnson, 2008;  Graff et al., 2012  Graff et al., , 2015)) .   To overcome space-time coverage sampling limitations, bio-optical oceanographers have implemented optical sensors on a variety of in situ or remote platforms, from research vessels and moorings to ocean color satellites, gliders and profiling floats, each with specific complementary space-time observation scales (Dickey, 2003;  Claustre et al., 2010) .   Such platforms enable to monitor bio-optical properties that serve as proxies for major biogeochemical variables.  Those include the concentration of chlorophyll a (Chla) and the particulate backscattering coefficient at 700 nm (hereafter referred simply as b bp ).  The chlorophyll a concentration is the most commonly used proxy for the phytoplankton carbon biomass (Cullen, 1982;  Siegel et al., 2013) , although it is well known that the ratio of Chla to carbon shows large fluctuations driven by a variety of factors such as phytoplankton physiology  (Geider, 1993;  Staehr et al., 2002;  Álvarez et al., 2016) or community composition  (Geider et al., 1997;  MacIntyre et al., 2002;  Halsey and Jones, 2015) .   In the absence of mineral particles (i.e., in most open-ocean waters), b bp generally covaries with, and is therefore used as a proxy of, the stock of particulate organic carbon (POC) (Stramski et al., 1999;  Loisel et al., 2002;  Bishop, 2009) .   However changes in the nature (composition and size) of the particle assemblage may cause large variability in the b bp signal and in the POC-to-b bp relationship (Flory et al., 2004;  Gardner et al., 2006;  Stramski et al., 2008;  Bishop, 2009) .  

 Examining bio-optical relationships, which for example link the inherent optical properties of particles such as absorption or scattering, to Chla, has long been an area of active research in bio-optical oceanography (Smith and Baker, 1978a;  Mitchell and Holm-Hansen, 1991;  Mitchell, 1992;  Bricaud et al., 1995;  Morel et al., 2007b;  Szeto et al., 2011;  Huot and Antoine, 2016;  Organelli et al., 2017a) .   Among different types of applications, bio-optical relationships enable deriving biogeochemical information over a broad range of space and time scales from in situ or remote optical measurements (Loisel et al., 2002;  Siegel et al., 2005;  Huot et al., 2007b) .   Such relationships are also used in semi-analytical inverse models to interpret remote sensing ocean color data (Gordon et al., 1988;  Loisel and Morel, 1998;  Morel and Maritorena, 2001) .   Various studies focused on the relationship between Chla and b bp using data from ocean color remote sensing (Reynolds et al., 2001;  Stramska et al., 2003) , field cruises  (Huot et al., 2008;  Dall'Olmo et al., 2009) , fixed mooring  (Antoine et al., 2011) , or Biogeochemical-Argo (BGC-Argo) profiling floats  (Xing et al., 2014) .   All of these studies confirmed the principle of the "bio-optical assumption" (Smith and Baker, 1978b;  Siegel et al., 2005) , suggesting that in open-ocean waters the optical properties of a water mass co-vary to a first order with Chla.   Yet, depending on the considered data set, previous studies also indicate large second-order variability around the mean b bp vs. Chla power-law relationship (Brown et al., 2008;  Huot et al., 2008;  Xing et al., 2014) .   Restricted to a given period of time, region or trophic regime and mainly to the surface layer of the water column, these studies did not lead to a thorough characterization of the variability in the relationship between Chla and b bp over the full range of environments encountered in the open ocean.  In addition, these studies involved different methodologies for b bp measurements or retrievals, so that it is difficult to untangle regional and/or seasonal variability from possible methodological biases (Sullivan et al., 2013) .  

 The recently launched network of BGC-Argo profiling floats is progressively transforming our capability to observe optical properties and biogeochemical processes in the oceans (Claustre et al., 2010;  IOCCG, 2011;  Biogeochemical-Argo Planning Group, 2016;  Johnson and Claustre, 2016) .   The current BGC-Argo bio-optical database has drastically increased over recent years and now encompasses observations collected in a broad range of hydrological, trophic and bio-optical conditions encountered in the world's open oceans (Organelli et al., 2017a  (Organelli et al., , 2017b)) .   Based on homogeneous measurements and processing methodologies, this database offers a unique opportunity to comprehensively reassess biooptical relationships.  Based on the analysis of more than 8500 multi-variable profiles collected within the water column (0-1000 m) by BGC-Argo floats, this study aims to (i) investigate the natural variability around the mean statistical b bp -to-Chla relationship at the vertical, regional and seasonal scales and (ii) identify the underlying sources of variability. 



 DATA AND METHODS  BGC-Argo profiling floats  BGC-Argo database An array of 105 BGC-Argo profiling floats was deployed in several areas of the world's oceans in the frame of several research programs (Organelli et al., 2016a  (Organelli et al., , 2017a Open data Edition) publisher  (Barbieux et al., 2017) .   In this database, profiles of b bp were eliminated when bathymetry was shallower than 400 m and a signature of b bp at depth was noticeable.  This allowed us to remove the data collected in waters where a coastal influence was suspected, Black Sea excepted.  Hence 8908 BGC-Argo multi-parameter profiles or "stations" (corresponding to 91 different BGC-floats) collected between November 8, 2012 

 and January 5, 2016, were used in this study.  These stations were grouped into 24 geographic areas (Table 1 ), following the bioregions presented in  Organelli et al. (2017a) , except for the Eastern Subtropical Atlantic Gyre that is missing in our database because of suspicious backscattering data from the two profiling floats deployed in this bioregion.   In this paper, we 

 show the graphs and data for each of these 24 bioregions so that each reader can evaluate the variability in the b bp :Chla ratio for any specific region of interest.  Our database includes measurements from a wide range of oceanic conditions, from subpolar to tropical waters and from eutrophic to oligotrophic conditions (Fig. 1 ).   For the purpose of simplifying the presentation of the results, we grouped the different bioregions into five main m between 1000 m and 250 m, 1 m between 250 m and 10 m, and 0.2 m between 10 m and the surface (Organelli et al., 2016a) .   Raw data (electronic counts) were transmitted to land, each time the floats surfaced, through Iridium two-way communication, and were converted into desired quantities.  Each variable was quality-controlled according to procedures described hereafter and specifically developed for BGC-Argo data (Schmechtig et al., 2014  (Schmechtig et al., , 2016;;  Organelli et al., 2016b) .   Additionally, all the casts were checked for data degradation due to bio-fouling or instrumental drift.  Labs, 2016) .   In order to correct for the effect of the socalled non-photochemical quenching (NPQ) (decrease in the fluorescence-to-Chla ratio under high light conditions) (Kiefer et al., 1973) , we systematically applied the procedure developed by  Xing et al. (2012) .   Besides, in some bioregions such as subtropical gyres or the Black Sea, the chlorophyll a concentration appeared to increase at depth where it should be null.  Proctor and Roesler (2010) assigned this behavior to the influence of fluorescence originating from non-algal matter.   Profiles were thus corrected according to Xing et al. (2016) .   Finally, following the recommendation by Roesler et al. (2017) for Chla measurements from WET Labs ECO fluorometers, the calibrated quality-controlled Chla values were divided by a correction factor of 2. The correction factor was deducted from a global comparison of paired HPLC (High Performance Liquid Chromatography) and in situ fluorescence Chla data, and confirmed by optical proxies of Chla such as light absorption line height  (Roesler and Barnard, 2013) or in situ radiometry  (Xing et al., 2011) .   The regional variability of this average correction factor along with its possible uncertainties is fully discussed in Roesler et al. (2017) .   We performed a sensitivity analysis of the b bp -to-Chla relationship to the factor used for correcting the fluorescence-based Chla values.  We tested the influence of using two sets of regional factors proposed by Roesler et al. (2017) derived either from HPLC analyses or radiometric measurements, compared to the global factor of 2. Except for the Southern Ocean that appears more sensitive than other regions to the choice of the correction factor, our analysis reveals that the regional factors induce minor changes to the b bp -to-Chla relationship.  



 Bio Overall those minor changes have little impact on the interpretation of our results.  Thereafter our analysis considers Chla values originating from the global correction factor.  Details of the sensitivity analysis may be found in supporting information SA presented as electronic supplementary material. 



 Particulate backscattering coefficient We followed the procedure established by Schmechtig et al. (2016) .   Backscattering sensors implemented on floats provide the angular scattering coefficient β at 124° and at 700 nm.  The particulate backscattering coefficient was calculated following Boss and Pegau (2001) :  

 b bp (700) (m -1 ) = ( ) x 2 x {β(124,700) - } (1)   with β(124,700) (m -1 sr -1 ) = slope x (counts -b b dark) 

 where the (instrument-specific) slope and b b dark are provided by the manufacturer, and ( ) is equal to 1.076 (Sullivan et al. 2013) .   The contribution of pure seawater ( ), was removed in order to take into account the effect of the temperature and salinity and was computed according to Zhang et al. (2009) .   Finally, vertical profiles were quality-controlled by verifying the range of measured values according to the technical specifications provided by the manufacturer (WET Labs, 2016) and removing negative spikes following Briggs et al. (2011) .   Remaining spikes were removed by applying a median filter (5-point window). 



 Estimation of uncertainty in the b bp -to-Chla ratio The backscattering and chlorophyll fluorescence sensors implemented on floats are all ECO3 sensors (WET Labs, Inc.).  This avoids heterogeneous sources of uncertainties associated with various sensors (see, e.g., (Roesler et al., 2017) ).   In addition, the data are calibrated and qualified following the recommended standard BGC-Argo procedure presented in Schmechtig et al. (2016) .   A thorough estimation of the uncertainties affecting the different parameters would necessitate an entirely dedicated study, which is beyond the scope of the present one. 

 However, an estimation of the average error that may influence our results has been made. 

 Accounting for measurement error only, we assume an error for the b bp sensor and for the chlorophyll fluorescence sensor, as provided by the manufacturer.  Following an error propagation law (Birge, 1939;  Ku, 1966) , the combined effect of these errors on the b bp -to-Chla ratio can be computed and a relative error (in %) can be obtained as:  

 (2)   Considering the surface data, a median error of 0.11% is obtained and 80% of the data show relative errors lower than 10% (Fig. 2a ).   Relative errors larger than 10% appear for the lowest values of b bp (<10 -3 m -1 ) and Chla (<10 -2 mg m-3) (Fig. 2b ), which corresponds to the clearest waters of the oligotrophic gyres.   In addition, a sensitivity analysis described in supporting information SA indicates that correcting the fluorescence-based Chla values of the database with regional factors compared to a global factor does not significantly affect the distribution of the computed errors in the b bp -to-Chla ratio (see electronic auxiliary material). 



 Derived variables  Physical and biogeochemical layers of the water column We consider four different layers of the water column: (i) the productive layer (Morel and Berthon, 1989) comprised between the surface and 1.5 Z eu , with Z eu corresponding to the euphotic depth which is the depth at which PAR is reduced to 1% of its surface value; (ii) the mixed layer where all properties are expected to be homogenous and that encompasses a large fraction of the phytoplankton biomass  (Brainerd and Gregg, 1995;  Taylor and Ferrari, 2010) ; (iii) the surface layer, observable by satellite remote sensing, extending from surface to the first optical depth (Z pd )  (Gordon and McCluney, 1975) ; and (iv) the deep chlorophyll maximum (DCM) layer (i.e.   thickness of the DCM) where different processes may lead to a Chla enhancement.  Unlike the productive layer, the surface, the mixed and the deep chlorophyll maximum layers are considered as homogeneous layers where the phytoplankton population is expected to be acclimated to the same light and nutrient regimes.  The 0-1.5 Z eu layer is chosen to estimate the average b bp -to-Chla ratio in the entire enlightened layer of the water column, even if it is acknowledged that large variations in this ratio may occur throughout this layer.  This average b bp -to-Chla ratio is thereafter used as a reference to which we compare the ratios calculated for the other layers of the water column. 

 The Mixed layer depth (MLD) was determined using a 0.03 kg m -3 density criterion (de Boyer Montégut, 2004) .   The euphotic depth Z eu and the penetration depth, Z pd = Z eu /4.6, were computed from the BGC-Argo PAR vertical profiles following the procedure described in Organelli et al. (2016b) .   Values of Z eu and Z pd are available from Organelli et al. (2016a) .   To study more specifically the dynamics of the bio-optical properties in the DCM layer and because the width of a DCM may fluctuate in space and time, we adjusted a Gaussian profile to each vertical profile of Chla of the database that presented a deep Chla maximum and computed the width of this DCM.  This parameterizing approach proposed by Lewis et al. (1983) has been widely used to fit vertical profiles of Chla (e.g.   Morel and Berthon, 1989;  Uitz et al., 2006) such as:  

 (2)   where c(z) is the Chla concentration at depth z, c max is the Chla concentration at the depth of the DCM (z max ) and z, the unknown, is the width of the DCM. 

 In order to retrieve , the unknown parameter, we performed an optimization of Eq. ( 2 ) with a maximum width set at 50 m so only the profiles with a relatively pronounced DCM are kept.   Then we computed the mean Chla and b bp for the layer that represents the thickness of the DCM.  Finally, all quality-controlled profiles of Chla and particulate backscattering coefficient were averaged within the different considered layers. 



 Environmental and biological parameters In Using the method of Uitz et al. (2006) ), an index of the phytoplankton community composition, based on the relative contributions of size classes to total chlorophyll a, was also computed from the surface Chla values.   We applied this procedure to the surface Chla values from our BGC-Argo database, that we further monthly averaged to finally obtain the relative contributions of micro-, nano-and picophytoplankton to the total chlorophyll a biomass for each bioregion within the 0-Z pd layer. 



 RESULTS  Overview of the BGC-Argo database A latitudinal decreasing gradient of surface Chla is observed from the North Subpolar Gyre (NSPG) and Southern Ocean (SO) regimes to the subtropical (STG) regime with a median Chla from ~1 mg m -3 to ~0.05 mg m -3 , respectively (Fig. 2a ).   It is noteworthy that, in our dataset where the South East Pacific Ocean is not represented, the South Atlantic Subtropical Gyre (SASTG) is the most oligotrophic bioregion, experiencing the lowest median Chla (0.014 mg m -3 ) and the highest median Z eu (135 m).  A west-to-east trophic gradient is observed in the Mediterranean Sea, with median surface Chla values of 0.186 mg m -3 and 0.025 mg m -3 in the Northwestern Basin and the Levantine Sea, respectively (Fig. 2a ).  



 Variability in the b bp -to-Chla relationship at the global scale within distinct layers of the water column The productive layer 3.2.1   In this layer, the b bp -to-Chla relationship follows a power law (R 2 = 0.74) (Fig. 3a ).   Yet when data from different regimes and bioregions are considered separately, regional and seasonal patterns emerge.  Bioregions of the subpolar NSPG and SO regimes (Figs.  4a-i ) show a significant correlation between Chla and b bp with high R 2 (> 0.60) and slope (i.e.   exponent of the power law) always above 0.50 (except for the Norwegian Sea, Fig. 4a ).   Minimal values of both Chla and b bp are encountered in winter whereas maximal values are reached in summer. 

 Deviations from the global log-log linear model occur in some bioregions of the NSPG regime, e.g. in the Icelandic Basin (ICB_NASPG) in summer (Fig. 4b ) and are characterized by an abnormally high b bp signal considering the observed Chla levels.   Such a deviation is found all year long in the Black Sea, where a correlation between Chla and b bp is no longer observable (R 2 = 0.09) (Fig. 4x ).   In the Mediterranean Sea, the slope and R 2 decrease from the Northwestern Basin (NW_MED, Fig. 4j ) to the Levantine Sea (LEV_MED, Fig.  4n ), where Chla appears to be decoupled from b bp .   In the Mediterranean Sea, a seasonal pattern is noticeable principally in the NW_MED, where the highest values of Chla and b bp are found in spring.  Except for the South Atlantic Subtropical Transition Zone (SASTZ) that displays a steep slope and a high R 2 value (0.68 and 0.80, respectively), regions from the subtropical regime do not show any significant correlation between Chla and b bp , featuring the lowest slope and R 2 values of the b bp -to-Chla relationship (Figs.  4o-w ).   This clearly suggests a decoupling between those two properties.  In these oligotrophic environments, different production regimes are delineated along the vertical axis in the upper and lower part of the euphotic zone.  One may expect that the b bp -to-Chla relationship will vary depending on the considered layer.  In this perspective, we further investigate the behavior of the bio-optical properties in different layers of the water column, namely the mixed layer, the surface layer and the DCM layer.  The subset of data from this layer also shows two distinct trends in the b bp -to-Chla relationship, for Chla values below or above 0.3 mg m -3 (Fig. 3d ).   For Chla > 0.3 mg m -3 , a positive correlation between b bp and Chla can be noticed, although with a large dispersion of the data around the regression line, whereas for Chla < 0.3 mg m -3 , Chla and b bp exhibit a strong decoupling.  The MED Sea (Figs.  SB1a-e ) is characterized by a stronger covariation between Chla and b bp than the STG regime (Figs.   SB1g-n ) (R 2 = 0.53 for NW_MED versus R 2 = 0.10 for SPSTG).   In the Mediterranean Sea, DCMs are seasonal phenomena occurring essentially in summer or fall (e.g., Siokou-Frangou et al., 2010) .   A covariation between b bp and Chla occurs as soon as a DCM takes place, with maximum values of b bp and Chla encountered in summer when the DCM is the most pronounced, in both the western and eastern Mediterranean basins (Figs.  SB1a-e ).   On the opposite, in the STG regime where durable stratification takes place, DCMs appear as a permanent pattern.  The b bp and Chla variations are decoupled and the highest values of both variables are recorded in spring or fall (Figs.  SB1f-n ).  



 DISCUSSION The present analysis of a global BGC-Argo database indicates a general power linear relationship between b bp and Chla in the productive layer as well as in the surface and mixed layers.  Nevertheless, the analysis of subsets of data suggests a large second-order variability around the global mean relationships, depending on the considered range of values in Chla and b bp , layer of the water column, region or season.  In this section, we investigate the sources of variability around the average b bp -to-Chla relationship in our database. 



 General relationship between Chla and b bp The chlorophyll a concentration is the most commonly used proxy for the phytoplankton carbon biomass (Cullen, 1982;  Siegel et al., 2013) whereas the particulate backscattering coefficient is considered as a proxy of the POC in open ocean  (Stramski et al., 1999;  Balch et al., 2001;  Cetinić et al., 2012;  Dall'Olmo and Mork, 2014 ) and provides information on the whole pool of particles, not specifically on phototrophic organisms.   Over broad biomass gradients, the stock of POC covaries with phytoplankton biomass and hence b bp and Chla show substantial covariation.  This is what is observed in the present study when the full database is considered (Fig. 3a ).   This is also the case when we examine subsets of data from the NSPG and SO regimes, which, although featuring strong seasonality, showing relatively constant relationships between b bp and Chla (Figs. 3a-c , 4a-i and 5a-i).   In such environments an increase in the concentration of chlorophyll a is associated with an increase in b bp .  Such significant relationships between b bp and Chla have indeed been reported in several studies based on relatively large datasets (Huot et al., 2008) or measurements from seasonally dynamic systems  (Stramska et al., 2003;  Antoine et al., 2011;  Xing et al., 2014) .   Our results corroborate these studies and yield a global relationship of the form b bp (700) = 0.00181 (±0.000014)  Chla 0.605 (±0.00484) for the productive layer. 

 Nevertheless, the b bp -to-Chla relationship is largely variable depending on the considered layer of the water column.  Regarding the mixed and surface layers, our study suggests a general relationship with determination coefficients smaller than those calculated for the productive layer.  The intercept (~0.0017) and more importantly the slope values (~0.36) associated with the surface layer are also lower than those associated with the productive layer (Table 3 ); hence for a given level of b bp , the Chla is lower for the surface layer than predicted by the productive layer relationship.   Empirical relationships of the literature previously established in various regions in the first few meters of the water column (Reynolds et al., 2001;  Dall'Olmo et al., 2009;  Antoine et al., 2011;  Xing et al., 2014) always show steeper slope compared to our results for the surface layer (Table  2 ).  

 To our knowledge, the present study proposes the first analysis of the b bp -to-Chla relationship within the DCM layer.  A significant relationship between b bp and Chla is observed and it is associated with the steepest slope, the highest RMSE and the lowest coefficient of determination in comparison with the other layers (Table 3 ).   Thus for the DCM layer, a given level of b bp is associated with higher values of Chla than predicted by the global relationship of the productive layer. 

 In the next two sections, we will investigate the underlying processes leading to the existence or not of a relationship between b bp and Chla and explore the variability of this relationship along the vertical dimension, the seasons and the distinct bioregions of the different regimes. 

 For this purpose we will consider the behavior of the b bp :Chla ratio with respect to light conditions and phytoplankton community composition. 



 Influence of the nature of the particulate assemblage on the b bp -to-Chla relationship Although the relationship between POC and b bp is evident in some regions, the particulate backscattering coefficient is not a direct proxy of POC.  It depends on several parameters such as the concentration of particles in the water column, their size distribution, shape, structure and refractive index (Morel and Bricaud, 1986;  Babin and Morel, 2003;  Huot et al., 2007b;  Whitmire et al., 2010) .   The b bp coefficient has been shown to be very sensitive to the presence of picophytoplankton as well as of non-algal particles of the submicron size range (e.g.  detritus, bacteria, viruses), especially in oligotrophic waters (Ahn et al., 1992;  Stramski et al., 2001;  Vaillancourt et al., 2004) , but also to particles up to 10 μm  (Loisel et al., 2007) .  

 In regions with substantial inputs of mineral particles, a shift towards enhanced b bp values for a constant Chla level occurs (Figs.  4w and  x and 5w and x).   Substantial concentrations of mineral particles, submicrometer particles of Saharan origin for example, have been shown to cause significant increases in the particulate backscattering signal (Prospero, 1996;  Claustre et al., 2002;  Stramski et al., 2004;  Loisel et al., 2011) .   The EQNASTZ bioregion exhibits, for example, particularly high b bp values compared to the low Chla found in the surface layer (Figs.  4w and  5w ).   This is not surprising considering that this region is located in the Equatorial North Atlantic dust belt (Kaufman et al., 2005) .   The Black Sea is also characterized by a higher b bp signal than predicted from Chla based on our global model (Figs.  4x and  5x ).   This could be explained by the fact that this enclosed sea follows a coastal trophic regime and is strongly influenced by river runoff that may carry small and highly refractive lithogenic particles (Ludwig et al., 2009;  Tanhua et al., 2013) .   Such an increase in backscattering signal may also be related to coccolithophorid blooms (Balch et al., 1996a) .  

 These small calcifying microalgae highly backscatter light due to their calcium carbonate shell and their presence could explain the episodically higher b bp than predicted by the global regression model particularly in the Black Sea where coccolithophorid blooms are frequently reported (Cokacar et al., 2001;  Kopelevich et al., 2013) or in the Iceland Basin  (Holligan et al., 1993;  Balch et al., 1996b) (Fig.  4b or 5b ).  

 Recently, the b bp :Chla ratio, proxy of the POC:Chla ratio (Behrenfeld et al., 2015;  Álvarez et al., 2016;  Westberry et al., 2016) , has been used as an optical index of phytoplankton communities, with low values associated with a dominance of diatoms in the phytoplankton assemblage  (Cetinić et al., 2012  (Cetinić et al., , 2015)) .   Indeed, in open-ocean waters, phytoplankton generally dominate the pool of particles in the water column.  A shift towards higher or weaker b bp values at a constant Chla level may be explained by changes in the phytoplankton community composition.  However, in oligotrophic environments, non-algal particles may represent a significant part of the particulate assemblage (Yentsch and Phinney, 1989;  Stramski et al., 2004;  Loisel et al., 2007) .   Indeed, a background of submicronic living biological cells such as viruses and bacteria or even non-living particles including detritus or inorganic particles could influence the b bp :Chla ratio (e.g.  Morel and Ahn, 1991;  Claustre et al., 1999;  Stramski et al., 2001) .  

 The lowest b bp :Chla values in our global database occur in summer in the NSPG and SO regimes (Figs.  6a-i ) and are associated with large contributions (>40%) of microphytoplankton to the total Chla.   This actually corroborates the hypothesis of Cetinić et al. (2012  Cetinić et al. ( , 2015) ) that b bp :Chla can be considered as an optical index of the phytoplankton community composition.   High values of the b bp :Chla ratio are associated with large contributions of pico-and nanophytoplankton to algal biomass and low values with diatomdominated communities.  The occurrence of microphytoplankton blooms of large-sized phytoplankton community is indeed well-known in the NSPG regime (Li, 2002;  Barton et al., 2015;  Cetinić et al., 2015) or in some productive regions of the Southern Ocean  (Uitz et al., 2009;  Georges et al., 2014;  Mendes et al., 2015) .   Similarly, in the NW_MED bioregion, low b bp :Chla values are accompanied by large contributions of microphytoplankton during the spring bloom (Marty and Chiavérini, 2010;  Siokou-Frangou et al., 2010;  Mayot et al., 2016) .  

 On the opposite, high b bp :Chla values in summer are rather associated with dominant contributions of the pico-and nanophytoplankton to the total chlorophyll biomass (Fig. 6j ) and also possibly to higher proportion of non-algal particles, consistently with  Navarro et al. (2014) or  Sammartino et al. (2015) .   In the rest of the Mediterranean basin (SW_MED, TYR_MED and the Eastern Basin) (Figs. 6k-n ) as well as in the subtropical regime, the phytoplankton biomass is essentially constant throughout the year with high b bp :Chla values in summer, lower values in winter, and a relatively constant picoplankton-dominated algal community (Figs.   6o-w )  (Dandonneau et al., 2004;  Uitz et al., 2006;  Ras et al., 2008) .   In this region, the seasonal cycle of the b bp :Chla ratio does not seem to be influenced at a first order by changes in phytoplankton community composition. 



 Influence of photoacclimation on the b bp -to-Chla relationship The Chla is an imperfect proxy of phytoplankton biomass that varies not only with phytoplankton carbon biomass but also with environmental conditions such as light, temperature or nutrient availability (Cleveland et al., 1989;  Babin et al., 1996;  Geider et al., 1997) .   Phytoplankton cells adjust their intracellular Chla in response to changes in light conditions through the process of photoacclimation (Falkowski and Laroche, 1991;  Lindley et al., 1995;  Eisner et al., 2003;  Dubinsky and Stambler, 2009) .   Photoacclimation-induced variations in intracellular Chla may cause large changes in the Chla-to-carbon ratio (Geider, 1987;  Behrenfeld et al., 2005;  Sathyendranath et al., 2009) and, thus, changes in the b bp -to-Chla ratio  (Behrenfeld and Boss, 2003;  Siegel et al., 2005) .   In the upper oceanic layer of the water column, photoacclimation to high light may result in an increase in the b bp -to-Chla ratio whereas a decrease in this ratio occurs in DCM layers or in the upper layer during winter time in subpolar regimes (NSPG and SO) where photoacclimation to low light occurs. 

 The impact of light conditions on the b bp :Chla ratio in the different regimes is illustrated in Fig. 8 . Significant trends are observed in the different layers of the water column for all regimes except for the Black Sea.   In the NSPG and SO regimes, the b bp :Chla ratio remains relatively constant with respect to the normalized PAR regardless of the considered layer of the water column (Figs.  7a-c ).   In contrast, the Mediterranean Sea and the subtropical gyres show a decoupling between b bp and Chla (Fig. 5k-w ) so the b bp :Chla ratio in the productive, mixed or surface layer increases with an increase in the normalized PAR (Fig.  7a-c ).   The seasonal cycle of the b bp :Chla ratio in these regimes results from variations in Chla whereas b bp remains relatively constant over the seasons (not shown).  Thus, our results suggest that the variability in the b bp :Chla ratio in the NSPG and SO regimes is not driven at first order by phytoplankton acclimation to light level even if such a process is known to occur at shorter temporal and spatial scales in those regimes (Lutz et al., 2003;  Behrenfeld et al., 2015) .   On the opposite, in both the MED and STG regimes the b bp :Chla ratio variations are essentially driven by phytoplankton photoacclimation.  In these oligotrophic regimes, Chla within the DCM layer is at least a factor of 2 higher than in the productive layer (Fig. 6 ).   In the lower part of the euphotic zone, phytoplankton cells hence adjust their intracellular Chla to low light conditions, resulting in a decrease in the b bp :Chla ratio.  In addition, the b bp :Chla ratio in this layer seems to remain constant within a regime regardless of absolute light conditions (Fig. 7d ).   Actually, the absolute values of PAR essentially vary between 10 and 25 μmol quanta m -2 s -1 in all the bioregions along the year with values exceeding 50 μmol quanta m -2 s -1 only in the NW_MED and EQNASTZ bioregions.  As reported by Letelier et al. (2004) and  Mignot et al. (2014) , the DCM may follow a given isolume along the seasonal cycle and is thus essentially light-driven.   Finally, we suggest that the relative homogeneity of both the environmental (PAR) conditions and phytoplankton community composition at the DCM level in subtropical regimes may explain the relative stability of the b bp :Chla values in this water column layer.  In the Mediterranean Sea, in contrast, some studies evoke changes in phytoplankton communities in the DCM layer (Crombet et al., 2011) suggesting our results might be further explored when relevant data are available.  



 Variability in the b bp -to-Chla relationship is driven by a combination of factors In the previous sections, we examined the processes that potentially drive the variability in the b bp -to-Chla relationship in the various oceanic regimes considered here.  In the subpolar regimes NSPG and SO, changes in the composition of the particle assemblage, phytoplankton communities in particular, are likely the first-order driver of the seasonal variability in the b bp -to-Chla ratio (Fig. 8 ).   In these regimes, the b bp :Chla ratio remains constant regardless of the light intensity in both the productive and surface layers suggesting that phytoplankton photoacclimation is likely not an important driver of the variability in the b bp -to-Chla relationship.  We note, however, that in the SO other factors may come into play, such as the light-mixing regime or iron-limitation (e.g.  Boyd, 2002;  Blain et al., 2007  Blain et al., , 2013)) .   On the opposite, in the subtropical regime, Chla and b bp are decoupled in the surface layer as well as in the DCM layer.  Thus, photoacclimation seems to be the main process driving the vertical and seasonal variability of the b bp -to-Chla relationship, although a varying contribution of non-algal particles to the particle pool cannot be excluded. 

 Whereas the subpolar and the subtropical regimes behave as a "biomass regime" and a "photoacclimation regime" (sensu Siegel et al., 2005) , respectively, the Mediterranean Sea stands as an intermediate regime between these two end-members.   The large number of data available in the Mediterranean allows us to describe this intermediate situation (Fig. 8 ).   The Mediterranean Sea appears as a more complex and variable system than the stable and resilient subtropical gyres.  Along with the ongoing development of the global Bio-Argo program and associated float deployments, additional data collected in underrepresented regions will become available to make our database more robust and will help to improve our analysis.  Indeed, in the surface layer of the Mediterranean system, a high b bp :Chla ratio in summer has previously been attributed not only to (i) a background of submicronic living biological cells such as viruses and bacteria or large contribution of non-living particles including detritus or inorganic particles (Claustre et al., 1999;  Bricaud et al., 2004;  Oubelkheir et al., 2005) , or to (ii) photoacclimation of phytoplankton cells to high light conditions as suggested by  Bellacicco et al. (2016) , but also to (iii) a shift towards small phytoplankton dominated communities (pico-or nanophytoplankton) after the seasonal microphytoplankton bloom.  

 Following the longitudinal trophic gradient of the Mediterranean Sea, we observe a variation in the biogeochemical status of the DCM (Fig. A1a-d ).   The DCM may be attributed to low light photoacclimation similarly to the DCM observed in the STG regime.  Yet, under favorable light and nutrient conditions encountered in the Western Mediterranean basin, the DCM could result from a real biomass increase occurring at depth instead of a simple photoacclimation "artifact" (Winn et al., 1995;  Beckmann and Hense, 2007;  Cullen, 2014;  Mignot et al., 2014) .   In such conditions referred to as "Deep Biomass Maximum" (DBM), a concurrent increase in Chla and POC associated with large phytoplankton cells leads to constantly low values of the b bp :Chla ratio (Fig. 7d ).   Our results corroborate previous studies (Latasa et al., 1992;  Crombet et al., 2011;  Mignot et al., 2014) about the seasonal occurrence of a DBM in the western basin of Mediterranean sea.   This deep feature could actually represent a significant source of phytoplankton carbon biomass that is ignored by satellite ocean color sensors that only probe the surface layer of the water column. 



 CONCLUSIONS The main goal of the present study was to examine the variability of the relationship between the particulate backscattering coefficient and the chlorophyll a concentration over a broad range of oceanic conditions.  Using an extensive BGC-Argo profiling float database, we investigated the sources of variability in this relationship with respect to the vertical dimension as well as on a seasonal and regional scale.  In accordance with previous studies (Reynolds et al., 2001;  Stramska et al., 2003;  Huot et al., 2008;  Dall'Olmo et al., 2009;  Antoine et al., 2011;  Xing et al., 2014) and consistently with the so-called "bio-optical assumption"  (Smith and Baker, 1978b;  Siegel et al., 2005) , a general covariation between b bp and Chla is observed at a global scale  (Loisel and Morel, 1998) in the productive layer of the water column (0-1.5 Z eu ).   Although this covariation seems to be permanent in subpolar regimes in relation with large-amplitude phytoplankton biomass seasonal cycles (Henson et al., 2006;  Boss and Behrenfeld, 2010;  Lacour et al., 2015) , several nuances have been revealed according to the season, considered layer of the water column and bioregion.   We suggest that the b bp :Chla ratio, proxy of the C:Chla ratio (Behrenfeld et al., 2015;  Westberry et al., 2016) , can be used as an index of the nature (composition and size) of the particle assemblage in a "biomass regime" (NSPG and SO regimes and Western Mediterranean basin) or as a photophysiological index in a "photoacclimation regime" (STG regime and Eastern  



 Mediterranean basin). The present analysis provides insights into the coupling between major proxies of the POC and phytoplankton biomass in key regimes encountered in the world's open oceans.  It points to the strong potential of the recently available global BGC-Argo float database to address regional or seasonal nuances in first order relationships that have been established in the past on admittedly restricted datasets.  In addition, this study stresses out the large variability in the b bp -to-Chla relationship, which is critical to the bio-optical modeling of the b bp coefficient in several semi-empirical ocean color models (Garver and Siegel, 1997;  Lee et al., 2002;  Maritorena et al., 2002) .   Indeed, bio-optical and reflectance models require detailed knowledge and parameterization of the average trends in the inherent optical properties, especially in open-ocean waters where these trends can be related to Chla.  Although the analysis of the impact of such variability on ocean color modeling is out of the scope of the present paper, we expect our analysis to be potentially useful in the context of applications to ocean color.  Finally, as the amount of BGC-float data will continue to increase, it will be possible to reassess the variability of bio-optical relationships and to establish new "global" standards and regional parameterizations. 



 Figure 1 : 1  Figure 1: Geographical location of the multi-variable vertical profiles collected by the BGC-Argo profiling floats represented in the database used in this study.  The geographic locations are superimposed on an annual climatology of the surface chlorophyll a concentration derived from MODIS-Aqua climatological observations for the year 2015 (https://oceancolor.gsfc.nasa.gov/cgi/l3). 



     regimes: ( 1 ) 1  the North Atlantic Subpolar Gyre (NSPG) divided in Icelandic basin, Labrador and Irminger Seas; (2) the Southern Ocean (SO) essentially comprising the Indian and the Atlantic sectors; (3) the Mediterranean Sea (MED) that comprises the Northwestern basin (NW_MED), the Southwestern basin (SW_MED), the Tyrrhenian Sea (TYR_MED), the Ionian Sea (ION_MED) and the Levantine Sea (LEV_MED); (4) the subtropical regimes (STG) that include subtropical oligotrophic waters from the North and South Atlantic and Pacific Oceans and Red Sea (RED_SEA); and (5) the Black Sea ( 



     order to analyze the variability in the b bp -to-Chla relationship, we consider the role of the light conditions in the various layers of the water column, i.e. the productive, mixed, surface and DCM layers.  The vertical profiles of b bp :Chla and PAR were averaged within each of the four considered layers.  For each layer, both variables the median value was computed monthly and regionally (i.e. for each regime).  For each layer and each regime, we determined the maximum observed PAR that was used to normalize the monthly median PAR values of the corresponding layer and regime (PAR norm ).  Ultimately, for each layer and each regime, the monthly median PAR norm values were classified into four different intervals (0-0.25;  0.25-0.50;  0.50-0.75;  0.75-1), and the monthly-averaged b bp : Chla values were assigned to one of these four PAR norm intervals. 



   Figure 2 : 2  Figure 2: Boxplot of the distribution, for each of the 24 bioregions represented in the BGC-Argo database used in this study, of the (a) chlorophyll a concentration (Chla) in the surface 



     Figure 3 : 3  Figure 3: Log-log scatterplot of the particulate backscattering coefficient at 700 nm (b bp ) as a 



   Figure 4 : 4  Figure 4: Log-log scatterplot of the particulate backscattering coefficient at 700 nm (b bp ) as a function of the chlorophyll a concentration (Chla) within the layer comprised between the surface and 1.5 Z eu for each bioregion.  The color code indicates the seasons.  The black line represent the average relationship calculated in this layer all bioregions combined and the red line corresponds to the regression model calculated for each bioregion considered here (when R 2 >0.2). 



     Figure 5 : 5  Figure 5: Log-log scatterplot of the particulate backscattering coefficient at 700 nm (b bp ) as a 404 function of the chlorophyll a concentration (Chla) within the surface layer (0-Z pd ) for each 405 bioregion.  The color code indicates the seasons.  For each plot, the black line represents the 406 average relationship calculated for the surface layer (0-Z pd ) for the entire database while the 407 red line is the regression model calculated for each bioregion (shown only if R 2 >0.2).  The 408 data points for the productive layer are shown in grey color.  409 410 



     Figure 6 : 6  Figure 6: Monthly climatology of the b bp :Chla ratio within the surface layer (0-Z pd ).  The color code indicates the fractional contribution of the microphytoplankton to the chlorophyll biomass associated with the entire phytoplankton assemblage, estimated from the Uitz et al. (2006) parameterization.  In each panel, the horizontal black line shows the minimum value of the b bp :Chla ratio determined within each bioregion.  The black lines represent the standard deviation for each data point. 



     Figure 7 : 7  Figure 7: Histogram of the monthly median b bp :Chla ratio as a function of the normalized Photosynthetically Available Radiation (PAR norm ) for each regime within (a) the layer comprised between the surface and 1.5 Z eu ; (b) the mixed layer; (c) the surface layer; and (d) 



     Figure 8 : 8  Figure 8: Conceptual scheme of the seasonal cycle of the b bp :Chla ratio in the surface layer of the ocean with potential factors explaining its variability.  HNLL: High Nutrient Low Light; HNHL: High Nutrient High Light; LNHL: Low Nutrient High Light; LNLL: Low Nutrient Low Light. 



       Photoacclimation                        Table        2 Biogeochemical-Argo sensor characteristics and sampling strategy   The 'PROVOR CTS-4' (NKE Marine Electronics Inc., France) is a profiling autonomous platform specifically designed in the context of the Remotely-Sensed Biogeochemical Cycles 



  in the Ocean (remOcean) and Novel Argo Ocean Observing System (NAOS) projects. The   PROVOR CTS-4 profiling floats used in this study were equipped with a SBE 41 CTD   (Seabird Inc., USA), an OCR-504 (SAtlantic Inc., USA) multispectral radiometer measuring   the Photosynthetically Available Radiation over the 400-700 nm range (PAR), and an ECO3   (Combined Three Channel Sensors; WET Labs, Inc., USA) measuring the fluorescence of   mission and scientific objectives. All casts started from the parking depth at 1000 m at a time   that was sufficient for surfacing around local noon. Vertical resolution of acquisition was 10  

 ).2.1.chlorophyll  a and Colored Dissolved Organic Matter (CDOM) at excitation/emission wavelengths of 470/695 nm and 370/460 nm respectively, and the angular scattering coefficient of particles (β(θ, λ)) measured at 700 nm and an angle of 124°.  Measurements were collected during upward casts programmed every 1, 2, 3, 5, or 10 days depending on the 

   -optical data processing 2.2.1 Chlorophyll a concentration     After dark counts have been subtracted from the raw signal, chlorophyll a fluorescence was   first converted into chlorophyll a concentration according to calibration coefficients provided   by the manufacturer (WET Labs, 2016). Following the procedures described in Schmechtig et   al. (2014), the real-time dedicated quality control procedure identified the occurrence of   negative spikes, adjusted chlorophyll a concentration profiles for cases of non-zero values at   depth and verified the range of measured values according to technical specifications   provided by the manufacturer (WET  

  Table 1 . 1  Bioregions with the corresponding abbreviation, regime and number of available floats and profiles represented in the BGC-Argo database used in the present study. 



  a   a   a   a   a   a   a     Table 2 . 2  Empirical relationship between the particulate backscattering coefficient (b bp ) and the c previously published in the literature with the corresponding reference and abbreviation, regi considered for analysis. 



  concentration of chlorophyll a (Chla)   ion and layer of the water column  

  Table 3 . 3  Empirical relationships obtained between the particulate backscattering coefficient (b bp ) and the concentration of chlorophyll a (Chla) for the different layers of the water column considered in this study.  We also indicate the associated statistics: Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) and coefficient of determination R 2 for the significance level of p < 0.001 



     ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This paper represents a contribution to the following research projects: remOcean (funded by the European Research Council , Grant Agreement No  246777 ),  NAOS (funded by the  Agence Nationale de la Recherche in the frame of the French ''  Equipement d'avenir'' program , Grant Agreement No  ANR J11R107-F ),  AtlantOS (funded by the  European Union 's  Horizon 2020 research and innovation program , Grant Agreement No  2014-633211 ),  E-AIMS (funded by the  European Commission 's  FP7 project, Grant Agreement No  312642 ), U.K. Bio-Argo (funded by the  British Natural Environment Research Council -NERC , Grant Agreement No  NE/L012855/1 ),  REOPTIMIZE (funded by the  European Union 's  Horizon 2020 research and innovation program ,  Marie Skłodowska-Curie Grant Agreement No  706781 ),  Argo-Italy (funded by the  Italian Ministry of Education, University and Research -MIUR) , and the  French Bio-Argo program (  Bio-Argo France ; funded by  CNES-TOSCA ,  LEFE Cyber , and  GMMC) .We thank the  PIs of several  BGC-Argo floats missions and projects:  Giorgio Dall'Olmo (  Plymouth Marine Laboratory, United Kingdom ;  E-AIMS and  U.K.  Bio-Argo );  Kjell-Arne Mork (  Institute of Marine Research, Norway; E-AIMS );  Violeta Slabakova (  Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Bulgaria; E-AIMS );  Emil Stanev (  University of Oldenburg, Germany ;  E-AIMS );  Claire Lo Monaco (  Laboratoire d'Océanographie et du Climat: Expérimentations et Approches Numériques );  Pierre-Marie Poulain (  National Institute of Oceanography and Experimental Geophysics, Italy; Argo-Italy );  Sabrina Speich (  Laboratoire de Météorologie Dynamique, France ;  LEFE-GMMC );  Virginie Thierry (  Ifremer, France ;  LEFE-GMMC );  Pascal Conan (  Observatoire Océanologique de Banyuls sur mer, France ;  LEFE-GMMC );  Laurent Coppola (  Laboratoire d'Océanographie de Villefranche, France ;  LEFE-GMMC );  Anne Petrenko (  Mediterranean Institute of Oceanography, France; LEFE-GMMC ); and  Jean-Baptiste Sallée (  Laboratoire d'Océanographie et du Climat, France ;  LEFE-GMMC ).  Collin Roesler (  Bowdoin College, USA ) and  Yannick Huot (  University of 





 246777  NAOS   ANR J11R107-F  AtlantOS  Equipement d'avenir'' program   2014-633211  E-AIMS  Horizon 2020 research and innovation program   312642  FP7   NE/L012855/1  REOPTIMIZE   706781  Marie Skłodowska-Curie Grant  Horizon 2020 research and innovation program   Bio-Argo France  French Bio-Argo program    Sherbrooke, Canada) are acknowledged for useful comments and fruitful discussion.  We also thank the International Argo Program and the CORIOLIS project that contribute to make the data freely and publicly available.  Data referring to (Organelli et al., 2016a) (doi:10.17882/47142)   and (Barbieux et al., 2017) (doi: 10.17882/49388) are freely available on SEANOE.  





 Light backscattering efficiency and related properties of some phytoplankters  Y.-H  Ahn    A  Bricaud    A  Morel     Deep. Res  39  11    1992    Ahn, Y.-H., A. Bricaud, and A. Morel (1992), Light backscattering efficiency and related properties of some phytoplankters, Deep. Res., 39(11), 1835-1855.   Size-dependent photoacclimation of the phytoplankton community in temperate shelf waters (southern Bay of Biscay)  E  Álvarez    X  A G  Morán    Á  López-Urrutia    E  Nogueira    10.3354/meps11580   Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser  543    2016    Álvarez, E., X. A. G. Morán, Á. López-Urrutia, and E. Nogueira (2016), Size-dependent photoacclimation of the phytoplankton community in temperate shelf waters (southern Bay of Biscay), Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser., 543, 73-87, doi:10.3354/meps11580.   Variability in optical particle backscattering in contrasting bio-optical oceanic regimes  D  Antoine    D  A  Siegel    T  Kostadinov    S  Maritorena    N  B  Nelson    B  Gentili    V  Vellucci    N  Guillocheau    10.4319/lo.2011.56.3.0955   Limnol. Oceanogr  56  3    2011    Antoine, D., D. A. Siegel, T. Kostadinov, S. Maritorena, N. B. Nelson, B. Gentili, V. Vellucci, and N. Guillocheau (2011), Variability in optical particle backscattering in contrasting bio-optical oceanic regimes, Limnol. Oceanogr., 56(3), 955-973, doi:10.4319/lo.2011.56.3.0955.   Light scattering properties of marine particles in coastal and open ocean waters as related to the particle mass concentration  M  Babin    A  Morel    10.4319/lo.2003.48.2.0843   Limnol. Oceanogr  48  2    2003    Babin, M., and A. Morel (2003), Light scattering properties of marine particles in coastal and open ocean waters as related to the particle mass concentration, Limnol. Oceanogr., 48(2), 843-859, doi:10.4319/lo.2003.48.2.0843.   Remote sensing of sea surface Sun-induced chlorophyll fluorescence: consequences of natural variations in the optical characteristics of phytoplankton and the quantum yield of chlorophyll a fluorescence  M  Babin    A  Morel    B  Gentili     Int. J. Remote Sens  17  12    1996    Babin, M., A. Morel, and B. Gentili (1996), Remote sensing of sea surface Sun-induced chlorophyll fluorescence: consequences of natural variations in the optical characteristics of phytoplankton and the quantum yield of chlorophyll a fluorescence, Int. J. Remote Sens., 17(12), 2417-2448.   The 1991 coccolithophore bloom in the central North Atlantic. 2. Relating optics to coccolith concentration  W  M  Balch    K  A  Kilpatrick    P  Holligan    D  Harbour    E  Fernandez    10.4319/lo.1996.41.8.1684   Limnol. Oceanogr  41  8    1996    Balch, W. M., K. a. Kilpatrick, P. Holligan, D. Harbour, and E. Fernandez (1996a), The 1991 coccolithophore bloom in the central North Atlantic. 2. Relating optics to coccolith concentration, Limnol. Oceanogr., 41(8), 1684-1696, doi:10.4319/lo.1996.41.8.1684.   The 1991 coccolithorphore bloom in the central North Atlantic: I. Optical properties and factors affecting their distribution  W  M  Balch    K  A  Kilpatrick    C  C  Trees     Limnol. Oceanogr  41  8    1996    Balch, W. M., K. A. Kilpatrick, and C. C. Trees (1996b), The 1991 coccolithorphore bloom in the central North Atlantic: I. Optical properties and factors affecting their distribution., Limnol. Oceanogr., 41(8), 1669-1683.   Optical backscattering in the Arabian Seacontinuous underway measurements of particulate inorganic and organic carbon  W  M  Balch    D  T  Drapeau    J  J  Fritz    B  C  Bowler    J  Nolan    10.1016/S0967-0637(01)00025-5   Deep Sea Res. I  48  11    2001    Balch, W. M., D. T. Drapeau, J. J. Fritz, B. C. Bowler, and J. Nolan (2001), Optical backscattering in the Arabian Sea- continuous underway measurements of particulate inorganic and organic carbon, Deep Sea Res. I, 48(11), 2423-2452, doi:10.1016/S0967-0637(01)00025-5.   A global database of vertical profiles derived from Biogeochemical Argo float measurements for biogeochemical and bio-optical applications  M  Barbieux    10.17882/49388   SEANOE  2017    Barbieux, M. et al. (2017), A global database of vertical profiles derived from Biogeochemical Argo float measurements for biogeochemical and bio-optical applications, SEANOE, doi:doi:10.17882/49388.   Physical controls of variability in North Atlantic phytoplankton communities  A  D  Barton    M  S  Lozier    R  G  Williams    10.1002/lno.10011   Limnol. Oceanogr  60  1    2015    Barton, A. D., M. S. Lozier, and R. G. Williams (2015), Physical controls of variability in North Atlantic phytoplankton communities, Limnol. Oceanogr., 60(1), 181-197, doi:10.1002/lno.10011.   Beneath the surface: Characteristics of oceanic ecosystems under weak mixing conditions -A theoretical investigation  A  Beckmann    I  Hense    10.1016/j.pocean.2007.09.002   Prog. Oceanogr  75  4    2007    Beckmann, A., and I. Hense (2007), Beneath the surface: Characteristics of oceanic ecosystems under weak mixing conditions -A theoretical investigation, Prog. Oceanogr., 75(4), 771-796, doi:10.1016/j.pocean.2007.09.002.   The beam attenuation to chlorophyll ratio: an optical index of phytoplankton physiology in the surface ocean ?  M  J  Behrenfeld    E  Boss    10.1016/j.dsr.2003.09.002   Deep Sea Res. I  50  12    2003    Behrenfeld, M. J., and E. Boss (2003), The beam attenuation to chlorophyll ratio: an optical index of phytoplankton physiology in the surface ocean ?, Deep Sea Res. I, 50(12), 1537-1549, doi:10.1016/j.dsr.2003.09.002.   Carbon-based ocean productivity and phytoplankton physiology from space  M  J  Behrenfeld    E  Boss    D  A  Siegel    D  M  Shea    10.1029/2004GB002299   Global Biogeochem. Cycles  19  1    2005    Behrenfeld, M. J., E. Boss, D. A. Siegel, and D. M. Shea (2005), Carbon-based ocean productivity and phytoplankton physiology from space, Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 19(1), 1-14, doi:10.1029/2004GB002299.   Revaluating ocean warming impacts on global phytoplankton  M  J  Behrenfeld    R  T  O'malley    E  S  Boss    T  K  Westberry    J  R  Graff    K  H  Halsey    A  J  Milligan    D  A  Siegel    M  B  Brown    10.1038/nclimate2838   Nat. Clim. Chang  6  3    2015    Behrenfeld, M. J., R. T. O'Malley, E. S. Boss, T. K. Westberry, J. R. Graff, K. H. Halsey, A. J. Milligan, D. A. Siegel, and M. B. Brown (2015), Revaluating ocean warming impacts on global phytoplankton, Nat. Clim. Chang., 6(3), 323-330, doi:10.1038/nclimate2838.   Role of photoacclimation on phytoplankton's seasonal cycle in the Mediterranean Sea through satellite ocean color data  M  Bellacicco    G  Volpe    S  Colella    R  Santoleri    10.1016/j.rse.2016.08.004   Remote Sens. Environ  184    2016    Bellacicco, M., G. Volpe, S. Colella, and R. Santoleri (2016), Role of photoacclimation on phytoplankton's seasonal cycle in the Mediterranean Sea through satellite ocean color data, Remote Sens. Environ., 184, 595-604, doi:10.1016/j.rse.2016.08.004.   The scientific rationale, design, and implementation plan for a Biogeochemical-Argo float array  2016  Biogeochemical-Argo Planning Group    Biogeochemical-Argo Planning Group (2016), The scientific rationale, design, and implementation plan for a Biogeochemical-Argo float array, Ed.     K    Johnson  H  Claustre    10.13155/46601     by K. Johnson H. Claustre, doi:10.13155/46601.   The Propagation of Errors  R  T  Birge    10.1119/1.1991484   Am. J. Phys  7  6    1939    Birge, R. T. (1939), The Propagation of Errors, Am. J. Phys., 7(6), 351-357, doi:10.1119/1.1991484.   Autonomous observations of the ocean biological carbon pump  J  K B  Bishop    10.5670/oceanog.2011   Oceanography  24  3    2009    Bishop, J. K. B. (2009), Autonomous observations of the ocean biological carbon pump, Oceanography, 24(3), 162-173, doi:10.5670/oceanog.2011.   Effect of natural iron fertilization on carbon sequestration in the Southern Ocean  S  Blain    10.1038/nature05700   Nature  446  7139    2007    Blain, S. et al. (2007), Effect of natural iron fertilization on carbon sequestration in the Southern Ocean, Nature, 446(7139), 1070-1074, doi:10.1038/nature05700.   Instrumented elephant seals reveal the seasonality in chlorophyll and light-mixing regime in the iron-fertilized Southern Ocean  S  Blain    S  Renaut    X  Xing    H  Claustre    C  Guinet    10.1002/2013GL058065   Geophys. Res. Lett  40  24    2013    Blain, S., S. Renaut, X. Xing, H. Claustre, and C. Guinet (2013), Instrumented elephant seals reveal the seasonality in chlorophyll and light-mixing regime in the iron-fertilized Southern Ocean, Geophys. Res. Lett., 40(24), 6368-6372, doi:10.1002/2013GL058065.   In situ evaluation of the initiation of the North Atlantic phytoplankton bloom  E  Boss    M  Behrenfeld    10.1029/2010GL044174   Geophys. Res. Lett  37  18    2010    Boss, E., and M. Behrenfeld (2010), In situ evaluation of the initiation of the North Atlantic phytoplankton bloom, Geophys. Res. Lett., 37(18), 1-5, doi:10.1029/2010GL044174.   Relationship of light scattering at an angle in the backward direction to the backscattering coefficient  E  Boss    W  S  Pegau    10.1364/AO.40.005503   Appl. Opt  40  30    2001    Boss, E., and W. S. Pegau (2001), Relationship of light scattering at an angle in the backward direction to the backscattering coefficient, Appl. Opt., 40(30), 5503-5507, doi:10.1364/AO.40.005503.   Environmental factors controlling phytoplankton processes in the Southern Ocean  P  W  Boyd    10.1046/j.1529-8817.2002.t01-1-01203.x   J. Phycol  38  5    2002    Boyd, P. W. (2002), Environmental factors controlling phytoplankton processes in the Southern Ocean, J. Phycol., 38(5), 844-861, doi:10.1046/j.1529-8817.2002.t01-1-01203.x.   Mixed layer depth over the global ocean: An examination of profile data and a profile-based climatology  C  De Boyer Montégut    10.1029/2004JC002378   J. Geophys. Res  109    2004    de Boyer Montégut, C. (2004), Mixed layer depth over the global ocean: An examination of profile data and a profile-based climatology, J. Geophys. Res., 109, 1-20, doi:10.1029/2004JC002378.   Surface mixed and mixing layer depths  K  E  Brainerd    M  C  Gregg     Deep Sea Res. I  42  9    1995    Brainerd, K. E., and M. C. Gregg (1995), Surface mixed and mixing layer depths, Deep Sea Res. I, 42(9), 1521-1543.   In situ methods for measuring the inherent optical properties of ocean waters  A  Bricaud    C  Roesler    J  R V  Zaneveld    10.4319/lo.1995.40.2.0393   Limnol. Oceanogr  40  2    1995    Bricaud, A., C. Roesler, and J. R. V. Zaneveld (1995), In situ methods for measuring the inherent optical properties of ocean waters, Limnol. Oceanogr., 40(2), 393-410, doi:10.4319/lo.1995.40.2.0393.   Natural variability of phytoplanktonic absorption in oceanic waters: Influence of the size structure of algal populations  A  Bricaud    H  Claustre    J  Ras    K  Oubelkheir    10.1029/2004JC002419   J. Geophys. Res  109  11  2004    Bricaud, A., H. Claustre, J. Ras, and K. Oubelkheir (2004), Natural variability of phytoplanktonic absorption in oceanic waters: Influence of the size structure of algal populations, J. Geophys. Res., 109(C11), doi:10.1029/2004JC002419.   High-resolution observations of aggregate flux during a sub-polar North Atlantic spring bloom  N  Briggs    M  J  Perry    I  Cetinić    C  Lee    E  D'asaro    A  M  Gray    E  Rehm    10.1016/j.dsr.2011.07.007   Deep Sea Res. I  58  10    2011    Briggs, N., M. J. Perry, I. Cetinić, C. Lee, E. D'Asaro, A. M. Gray, and E. Rehm (2011), High-resolution observations of aggregate flux during a sub-polar North Atlantic spring bloom, Deep Sea Res. I, 58(10), 1031-1039, doi:10.1016/j.dsr.2011.07.007.   The origin and global distribution of second order variability in satellite ocean color and its potential applications to algorithm development  C  A  Brown    Y  Huot    P  J  Werdell    B  Gentili    H  Claustre    10.1016/j.rse.2008.06.008   Remote Sens. Environ  112  12    2008    Brown, C. A., Y. Huot, P. J. Werdell, B. Gentili, and H. Claustre (2008), The origin and global distribution of second order variability in satellite ocean color and its potential applications to algorithm development, Remote Sens. Environ., 112(12), 4186-4203, doi:10.1016/j.rse.2008.06.008.   Particulate organic carbon and inherent optical properties during 2008 North Atlantic Bloom Experiment  I  Cetinić    M  J  Perry    N  T  Briggs    E  Kallin    E  A  . D'asaro    C  M  Lee    10.1029/2011JC007771   J. Geophys. Res  117  6028  2012    Cetinić, I., M. J. Perry, N. T. Briggs, E. Kallin, E. A. D'Asaro, and C. M. Lee (2012), Particulate organic carbon and inherent optical properties during 2008 North Atlantic Bloom Experiment, J. Geophys. Res., 117, C06028, doi:10.1029/2011JC007771.   Optical community index to assess spatial patchiness during the 2008 North Atlantic Bloom  I  Cetinić    M  J  Perry    E  D'asaro    N  Briggs    N  Poulton    M  E  Sieracki    C  M  Lee    10.5194/bgd-11-12833-2014   Biogeosciences Discuss  11  9    2014    Cetinić, I., M. J. Perry, E. D'Asaro, N. Briggs, N. Poulton, M. E. Sieracki, and C. M. Lee (2014), Optical community index to assess spatial patchiness during the 2008 North Atlantic Bloom, Biogeosciences Discuss., 11(9), 12833-12870, doi:10.5194/bgd-11-12833-2014.   A simple optical index shows spatial and temporal heterogeneity in phytoplankton community composition during the 2008 North Atlantic Bloom Experiment  I  Cetinić    M  J  Perry    E  D'asaro    N  Briggs    N  Poulton    M  E  Sieracki    C  M  Lee    10.5194/bg-12-2179-2015   Biogeosciences  12  7    2015    Cetinić, I., M. J. Perry, E. D'Asaro, N. Briggs, N. Poulton, M. E. Sieracki, and C. M. Lee (2015), A simple optical index shows spatial and temporal heterogeneity in phytoplankton community composition during the 2008 North Atlantic Bloom Experiment, Biogeosciences, 12(7), 2179-2194, doi:10.5194/bg-12-2179-2015.   Variability in particle attenuation and chlorophyll fluorescence in the tropical Pacific : Scales, patterns, and biogeochemical implications  H  Claustre    A  Morel    M  Babin    C  Cailliau    D  Marie    J.-C  Marty    D  Tailliez    D  Vaulot     J. Geophys. Res  104  C2    1999    Claustre, H., A. Morel, M. Babin, C. Cailliau, D. Marie, J.-C. Marty, D. Tailliez, and D. Vaulot (1999), Variability in particle attenuation and chlorophyll fluorescence in the tropical Pacific : Scales, patterns, and biogeochemical implications, J. Geophys. Res., 104(C2), 3401-3422.   Is desert dust making oligotrophic waters greener?  H  Claustre    A  Morel    S  B  Hooker    M  Babin    D  Antoine    K  Oubelkheir    A  Bricaud    K  Leblanc    B  Quéguiner    S  Maritorena    10.1029/2001GL014056   Geophys. Res. Lett  29  10    2002    Claustre, H., A. Morel, S. B. Hooker, M. Babin, D. Antoine, K. Oubelkheir, A. Bricaud, K. Leblanc, B. Quéguiner, and S. Maritorena (2002), Is desert dust making oligotrophic waters greener?, Geophys. Res. Lett., 29(10), 107-1-107-4, doi:10.1029/2001GL014056.   Bio-optical profiling floats as new observational tools for biogeochemical and ecosystem studies: Potential synergies with ocean color remote sensing  H  Claustre     Proceedings of the OceanObs'09: Sustained Ocean Observations and Information for Society" Conference  J  Hall    D  E  Harrison    D  Stammer    the OceanObs'09: Sustained Ocean Observations and Information for Society" Conference Venice, Italy    ESA Publ. WPP  2010. Sep  306      Claustre, H. et al. (2010), Bio-optical profiling floats as new observational tools for biogeochemical and ecosystem studies: Potential synergies with ocean color remote sensing., in "Proceedings of the OceanObs'09: Sustained Ocean Observations and Information for Society" Conference, edited by J. Hall, D. E. Harrison, and D. Stammer, ESA Publ. WPP-306, Venice, Italy, 21-25 Sep.   Maximal quantum yield of photosynthesis in the northwest Sargasso Sea  J  S  Cleveland    M  J  Perry    D  A  Kiefer    M  C  Talbot     J. Mar. Res  47    1989    Cleveland, J. S., M. J. Perry, D. A. Kiefer, and M. C. Talbot (1989), Maximal quantum yield of photosynthesis in the northwest Sargasso Sea., J. Mar. Res., 47, 869-886.   Structure of Emiliania huxleyi blooms in the Black Sea surface waters as detected by SeaWIFS imagery  T  Cokacar    N  Kubilay    T  Oguz    10.1029/2001GL013770   Geophys. Res. Lett  28  24    2001    Cokacar, T., N. Kubilay, and T. Oguz (2001), Structure of Emiliania huxleyi blooms in the Black Sea surface waters as detected by SeaWIFS imagery, Geophys. Res. Lett., 28(24), 4607-4610, doi:10.1029/2001GL013770.   Deep silicon maxima in the stratified oligotrophic Mediterranean Sea  Y  Crombet    K  Leblanc    B  Quéuiner    T  Moutin    P  Rimmelin    J  Ras    H  Claustre    N  Leblond    L  Oriol    M  Pujo-Pay    10.5194/bg-8-459-2011   Biogeosciences  8  2    2011    Crombet, Y., K. Leblanc, B. Quéuiner, T. Moutin, P. Rimmelin, J. Ras, H. Claustre, N. Leblond, L. Oriol, and M. Pujo-Pay (2011), Deep silicon maxima in the stratified oligotrophic Mediterranean Sea, Biogeosciences, 8(2), 459-475, doi:10.5194/bg-8-459-2011.   The Deep Chlorophyll Maximum : Comparing Vertical Profiles of Chlorophyll a  J  J  Cullen     Can. J. Fish.Aquat.Sci  39    1982    Cullen, J. J. (1982), The Deep Chlorophyll Maximum : Comparing Vertical Profiles of Chlorophyll a, Can. J. Fish.Aquat.Sci, 39, 791-803.   Subsurface Chlorophyll Maximum Layers: Enduring Enigma or Mystery Solved ?  J  J  Cullen    10.1146/annurev-marine-010213-135111   Ann. Rev. Mar. Sci  7    2014    Cullen, J. J. (2014), Subsurface Chlorophyll Maximum Layers: Enduring Enigma or Mystery Solved ?, Ann. Rev. Mar. Sci., 7, 207-239, doi:10.1146/annurev-marine-010213-135111.   Carbon export by small particles in the Norwegian Sea  G  Dall'olmo    K  A  Mork    10.1002/2014GL059244   Geophys. Res. Lett  41  8    2014    Dall'Olmo, G., and K. A. Mork (2014), Carbon export by small particles in the Norwegian Sea, Geophys. Res. Lett., 41(8), 2921-2927, doi:10.1002/2014GL059244.   Significant contribution of large particles to optical backscattering in the open ocean  G  Dall'olmo    T  K  Westberry    M  J  Behrenfeld    E  Boss    W  H  Slade    10.5194/bg-6-947-2009   Biogeosciences  6  6    2009    Dall'Olmo, G., T. K. Westberry, M. J. Behrenfeld, E. Boss, and W. H. Slade (2009), Significant contribution of large particles to optical backscattering in the open ocean, Biogeosciences, 6(6), 947-967, doi:10.5194/bg-6-947-2009.   Seasonal and interannual variability of ocean color and composition of phytoplankton communities in the North Atlantic, equatorial Pacific and South Pacific  Y  Dandonneau    P.-Y  Deschamps    J.-M  Nicolas    H  Loisel    J  Blanchot    Y  Montel    F  Thieuleux    G  Bécu    10.1016/j.dsr2.2003.07.018   Deep Sea Res. II  51  1-3    2004    Dandonneau, Y., P.-Y. Deschamps, J.-M. Nicolas, H. Loisel, J. Blanchot, Y. Montel, F. Thieuleux, and G. Bécu (2004), Seasonal and interannual variability of ocean color and composition of phytoplankton communities in the North Atlantic, equatorial Pacific and South Pacific, Deep Sea Res. II, 51(1-3), 303-318, doi:10.1016/j.dsr2.2003.07.018.   Emerging ocean observations for interdisciplinary data assimilation systems  T  D  Dickey    10.1016/S0924-7963(03)00011-3   J. Mar. Syst  40  41    2003    Dickey, T. D. (2003), Emerging ocean observations for interdisciplinary data assimilation systems, J. Mar. Syst., 40-41, 5- 48, doi:10.1016/S0924-7963(03)00011-3.   Photoacclimation processes in phytoplankton: Mechanisms, consequences, and applications  Z  Dubinsky    N  Stambler    10.3354/ame01345   Aquat. Microb. Ecol  56  2-3    2009    Dubinsky, Z., and N. Stambler (2009), Photoacclimation processes in phytoplankton: Mechanisms, consequences, and applications, Aquat. Microb. Ecol., 56(2-3), 163-176, doi:10.3354/ame01345.   Resolving phytoplankton photoprotective : photosynthetic carotenoid ratios on fine scales using in situ spectral absorption measurements  L  B  Eisner    M  S  Twardowski    T  J  Cowles    M  J  Perry    10.4319/lo.2003.48.2.0632   Limnol. Oceanogr  48  2    2003    Eisner, L. B., M. S. Twardowski, T. J. Cowles, and M. J. Perry (2003), Resolving phytoplankton photoprotective : photosynthetic carotenoid ratios on fine scales using in situ spectral absorption measurements, Limnol. Oceanogr., 48(2), 632-646, doi:10.4319/lo.2003.48.2.0632.   Acclimation to spectral irradiance in algae  P  G  Falkowski    J  Laroche    10.1111/j.0022-3646.1991.00008.x   J. Phycol  27    1991    Falkowski, P. G., and J. Laroche (1991), Acclimation to spectral irradiance in algae, J. Phycol., 27, 8-14, doi:10.1111/j.0022- 3646.1991.00008.x.   The relationship between floc area and backscatter during a spring phytoplankton bloom  E  N  Flory    P  S  Hill    T  G  Milligan    J  Grant    10.1016/j.dsr.2003.09.012   Deep Sea Res. I  51  2    2004    Flory, E. N., P. S. Hill, T. G. Milligan, and J. Grant (2004), The relationship between floc area and backscatter during a spring phytoplankton bloom, Deep Sea Res. I, 51(2), 213-223, doi:10.1016/j.dsr.2003.09.012.   Global POC concentrations from in-situ and satellite data  W  D  Gardner    A  V  Mishonov    M  J  Richardson    10.1016/j.dsr2.2006.01.029   Deep. Res. II  53  5-7    2006    Gardner, W. D., A. V. Mishonov, and M. J. Richardson (2006), Global POC concentrations from in-situ and satellite data, Deep. Res. II, 53(5-7), 718-740, doi:10.1016/j.dsr2.2006.01.029.   Inherent optical property inversion of ocean color spectra and its biogeochemical interpretation 1. Time series from the Sargasso Sea  S  A  Garver    D  A  Siegel     J. Geophys. Res  102  96    1997    Garver, S. A., and D. A. Siegel (1997), Inherent optical property inversion of ocean color spectra and its biogeochemical interpretation 1. Time series from the Sargasso Sea, J. Geophys. Res., 102(96), 607-625.   Light and temperature dependence of the carbon to chlorophyll a ratio in microalgae and cyanobacteria : Implications for physiology and growth of phytoplankton  R  J  Geider     New Phytol  106  1    1987    Geider, R. J. (1987), Light and temperature dependence of the carbon to chlorophyll a ratio in microalgae and cyanobacteria : Implications for physiology and growth of phytoplankton, New Phytol., 106(1), 1-34.   Quantitative phytoplankton physiology: implications for primary production and phytoplankton growth  R  J  Geider     ICES Mar. Sci. Symp  197    1993    Geider, R. J. (1993), Quantitative phytoplankton physiology: implications for primary production and phytoplankton growth, ICES Mar. Sci. Symp., 197, 52-62.   Dynamic model of phytoplankton growth and acclimation: Responses of the balanced growth rate and the chlorophyll a:carbon ratio to light, nutrient-limitation and temperature  R  J  Geider    H  L  Macintyre    T  M  Kana    10.3354/meps148187   Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser  148  1-3    1997    Geider, R. J., H. L. MacIntyre, and T. M. Kana (1997), Dynamic model of phytoplankton growth and acclimation: Responses of the balanced growth rate and the chlorophyll a:carbon ratio to light, nutrient-limitation and temperature, Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser., 148(1-3), 187-200, doi:10.3354/meps148187.   Protist community composition during early phytoplankton blooms in the naturally iron-fertilized Kerguelen area (Southern Ocean)  C  Georges    S  Monchy    S  Genitsaris    U  Christaki    10.5194/bg-11-5847-2014   Biogeosciences  11  20    2014    Georges, C., S. Monchy, S. Genitsaris, and U. Christaki (2014), Protist community composition during early phytoplankton blooms in the naturally iron-fertilized Kerguelen area (Southern Ocean), Biogeosciences, 11(20), 5847-5863, doi:10.5194/bg-11-5847-2014.   Estimation of the Depth of Sunlight Penetration in the Sea for Remote Sensing  H  R  Gordon    W  R  Mccluney    10.1364/AO.14.000413   Appl. Opt  14  2    1975    Gordon, H. R., and W. R. McCluney (1975), Estimation of the Depth of Sunlight Penetration in the Sea for Remote Sensing, Appl. Opt., 14(2), 413-416, doi:10.1364/AO.14.000413.   A Semianalytic Radiance Model of Ocean Color  R  Gordon    O  B  Brown    H  Evans    W  Brown    C  Smith    K  Baker    D  K  Clark     J. Geophys. Res  93  8    1988    Gordon, R., O. B. Brown, H. Evans, W. Brown, C. Smith, K. Baker, and D. K. Clark (1988), A Semianalytic Radiance Model of Ocean Color, J. Geophys. Res., 93(8), 10909-10924.   The measurement of phytoplankton biomass using flow-cytometric sorting and elemental analysis of carbon  J  R  Graff    A  J  Milligan    M  J  Behrenfeld    10.4319/lom.2012.10.910   Limnol. Oceanogr. Methods  10    2012    Graff, J. R., A. J. Milligan, and M. J. Behrenfeld (2012), The measurement of phytoplankton biomass using flow-cytometric sorting and elemental analysis of carbon, Limnol. Oceanogr. Methods, 10, 910-920, doi:10.4319/lom.2012.10.910.   Analytical phytoplankton carbon measurements spanning diverse ecosystems  J  R  Graff    T  K  Westberry    A  J  Milligan    M  B  Brown    G  Dall'olmo    V  Van Dongen-Vogels    K  M  Reifel    M  J  Behrenfeld    10.1016/j.dsr.2015.04.006   Deep Sea Res. I  102    2015    Graff, J. R., T. K. Westberry, A. J. Milligan, M. B. Brown, G. Dall'Olmo, V. Van Dongen-Vogels, K. M. Reifel, and M. J. Behrenfeld (2015), Analytical phytoplankton carbon measurements spanning diverse ecosystems, Deep Sea Res. I, 102, 16-25, doi:10.1016/j.dsr.2015.04.006.   Phytoplankton Strategies for Photosynthetic Energy Allocation  K  H  Halsey    B  M  Jones    10.1146/annurev-marine-010814-015813   Ann. Rev. Mar. Sci  7  1    2015    Halsey, K. H., and B. M. Jones (2015), Phytoplankton Strategies for Photosynthetic Energy Allocation, Ann. Rev. Mar. Sci., 7(1), 265-297, doi:10.1146/annurev-marine-010814-015813.   Effect of meteorological conditions on interannual variability in timing and magnitude of the spring bloom in the Irminger Basin, North Atlantic  S  Henson    I  Robinson    J  T  Allen    J  J  Waniek    10.1016/j.dsr.2006.07.009   Deep Sea Res. I  53  10    2006    Henson, S. a., I. Robinson, J. T. Allen, and J. J. Waniek (2006), Effect of meteorological conditions on interannual variability in timing and magnitude of the spring bloom in the Irminger Basin, North Atlantic, Deep Sea Res. I, 53(10), 1601- 1615, doi:10.1016/j.dsr.2006.07.009.   A biogeochemical study of the coccolithophore, Emiliania huxleyi, in the north atlantic  P  M  Holligan     Global Biogeochem. Cycles  7  4    1993    Holligan, P. M. et al. (1993), A biogeochemical study of the coccolithophore, Emiliania huxleyi, in the north atlantic, Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 7(4), 879-900.   Understanding the role of the biological pump in the global carbon cycle: An imperative for ocean science  S  Honjo    10.5670/oceanog.2014   Oceanography  27  3    2014    Honjo, S. et al. (2014), Understanding the role of the biological pump in the global carbon cycle: An imperative for ocean science, Oceanography, 27(3), 10-16, doi:10.5670/oceanog.2014.   Remote sensing reflectance anomalies in the ocean  Y  Huot    D  Antoine    10.1016/j.rse.2016.06.002   Remote Sens. Environ  184    2016    Huot, Y., and D. Antoine (2016), Remote sensing reflectance anomalies in the ocean, Remote Sens. Environ., 184, 101-111, doi:10.1016/j.rse.2016.06.002.   Relationship between photosynthetic parameters and different proxies of phytoplankton biomass in the subtropical ocean  Y  Huot    M  Babin    F  Bruyant    C  Grob    M  S  Twardowski    H  Claustre    C  To    10.5194/bg-4-853-2007   Biogeosciences  4    2007    Huot, Y., M. Babin, F. Bruyant, C. Grob, M. S. Twardowski, H. Claustre, and C. To (2007), Relationship between photosynthetic parameters and different proxies of phytoplankton biomass in the subtropical ocean, Biogeosciences, 4, 853-868, doi:10.5194/bg-4-853-2007.   Particle optical backscattering along a chlorophyll gradient in the upper layer of the eastern South Pacific Ocean  Y  Huot    A  Morel    M  S  Twardowski    D  Stramski    R  A  Reynolds    10.5194/bgd-4-4571-2007   Biogeosciences  5    2008    Huot, Y., A. Morel, M. S. Twardowski, D. Stramski, and R. A. Reynolds (2008), Particle optical backscattering along a chlorophyll gradient in the upper layer of the eastern South Pacific Ocean, Biogeosciences, 5, 495-507, doi:10.5194/bgd-4-4571-2007.   Remote Sensing of Inherent Optical Properties : Fundamentals, Tests of Algorithms, and Applications  Ioccg    10.1006/jmbi.1998.2073   Bio-Optical Sensors on Argo Floats, IOCCG Rep. Ser  5    2006. 2011    IOCCG Rep. Ser.  IOCCG (2006), Remote Sensing of Inherent Optical Properties : Fundamentals, Tests of Algorithms, and Applications, IOCCG Rep. Ser. 5, 1-126, doi:10.1006/jmbi.1998.2073. IOCCG (2011), Bio-Optical Sensors on Argo Floats, IOCCG Rep. Ser. 11, 1-89.   Bringing Biogeochemistry into the Argo Age  K  Johnson    H  Claustre    10.1029/2016EO062427   Eos    2016  Washington. DC    Johnson, K., and H. Claustre (2016), Bringing Biogeochemistry into the Argo Age, Eos (Washington. DC)., 1-7, doi:10.1029/2016EO062427.   Dust transport and deposition observed from the Terra-Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) spacecraft over the Atlantic Ocean  Y  J  Kaufman    I  Koren    L  A  Remer    D  Tanré    P  Ginoux    S  Fan    10.1029/2003JD004436   J. Geophys. Res  110  10    2005    Kaufman, Y. J., I. Koren, L. A. Remer, D. Tanré, P. Ginoux, and S. Fan (2005), Dust transport and deposition observed from the Terra-Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) spacecraft over the Atlantic Ocean, J. Geophys. Res., 110(10), 1-16, doi:10.1029/2003JD004436.   Chlorophyll a Fluorescence in Marine Centric Diatoms: Responses of Chloroplasts to Light and Nutrient Stress  D  A  Kiefer    S  Diego    L  Jolla     Mar. Biol  46    1973    Kiefer, D. A., S. Diego, and L. Jolla (1973), Chlorophyll a Fluorescence in Marine Centric Diatoms: Responses of Chloroplasts to Light and Nutrient Stress, Mar. Biol., 46, 39-46.   Satellite monitoring of coccolithophore blooms in the Black Sea from ocean color data  O  Kopelevich    V  Burenkov    S  Sheberstov    S  Vazyulya    M  Kravchishina    L  Pautova    V  Silkin    V  Artemiev    A  Grigoriev    10.1016/j.rse.2013.09.009   Remote Sens. Environ  146    2013    Kopelevich, O., V. Burenkov, S. Sheberstov, S. Vazyulya, M. Kravchishina, L. Pautova, V. Silkin, V. Artemiev, and A. Grigoriev (2013), Satellite monitoring of coccolithophore blooms in the Black Sea from ocean color data, Remote Sens. Environ., 146, 113-123, doi:10.1016/j.rse.2013.09.009.   Notes on the use of propagation of error formulas  H  H  Ku    10.6028/jres.070C.025   J. Res. Natl. Bur. Stand. Sect. C Eng. Instrum  70  4  263  1966    Ku, H. H. (1966), Notes on the use of propagation of error formulas, J. Res. Natl. Bur. Stand. Sect. C Eng. Instrum., 70C(4), 263, doi:10.6028/jres.070C.025.   Phytoplankton biomass cycles in the North Atlantic subpolar gyre: A similar mechanism for two different blooms in the Labrador Sea  L  Lacour    H  Claustre    L  Prieur    F  D  Ortenzio    10.1002/2015GL064540   Geophys. Res. Lett  42  13    2015    Lacour, L., H. Claustre, L. Prieur, and F. D. Ortenzio (2015), Phytoplankton biomass cycles in the North Atlantic subpolar gyre: A similar mechanism for two different blooms in the Labrador Sea, Geophys. Res. Lett., 42(13), 5403-5410, doi:10.1002/2015GL064540.   Plankton pigment relationships in the Northwestern Mediterranean during stratification  M  Latasa    M  Estrada    M  Delgado     Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser  88    1992    Latasa, M., M. Estrada, and M. Delgado (1992), Plankton pigment relationships in the Northwestern Mediterranean during stratification, Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser., 88, 61-73.   Deriving inherent optical properties from water color: a multiband quasianalytical algorithm for optically deep waters  Z  Lee    K  L  Carder    R  Arnone    10.1364/AO.41.005755   Appl. Opt  41  27    2002    Lee, Z., K. L. Carder, and R. a Arnone (2002), Deriving inherent optical properties from water color: a multiband quasi- analytical algorithm for optically deep waters., Appl. Opt., 41(27), 5755-72, doi:10.1364/AO.41.005755.   The microbial carbon pump concept: Potential biogeochemical significance in the globally changing ocean  L  Legendre    R  B  Rivkin    M  G  Weinbauer    L  Guidi    J  Uitz    10.1016/j.pocean.2015.01.008   Prog. Oceanogr  134    2015    Legendre, L., R. B. Rivkin, M. G. Weinbauer, L. Guidi, and J. Uitz (2015), The microbial carbon pump concept: Potential biogeochemical significance in the globally changing ocean, Prog. Oceanogr., 134, 432-450, doi:10.1016/j.pocean.2015.01.008.   Light driven seasonal patterns of chlorophyll and nitrate in the lower euphotic zone of the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre  R  M  Letelier    D  M  Karl    M  R  Abbott    R  R  Bidigare    10.4319/lo.2004.49.2.0508   Limnol. Oceanogr  49  2    2004    Letelier, R. M., D. M. Karl, M. R. Abbott, and R. R. Bidigare (2004), Light driven seasonal patterns of chlorophyll and nitrate in the lower euphotic zone of the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre, Limnol. Oceanogr., 49(2), 508-519, doi:10.4319/lo.2004.49.2.0508.   Phytoplankton and thermal structure in the upper ocean: Consequences of nonuniformity in chlorophyll profile  M  R  Lewis    J  J  Cullen    T  Platt    10.1029/JC088iC04p02565   J. Geophys. Res  88  C4    1983    Lewis, M. R., J. J. Cullen, and T. Platt (1983), Phytoplankton and thermal structure in the upper ocean: Consequences of nonuniformity in chlorophyll profile, J. Geophys. Res., 88(C4), 2565-2570, doi:10.1029/JC088iC04p02565.   Macroecological patterns of phytoplankton in th northwestern North Atlantic Ocean  W  K W  Li    10.1038/nature00983   Nature  419    2002. 6903    Li, W. K. W. (2002), Macroecological patterns of phytoplankton in th northwestern North Atlantic Ocean, Nature, 419(6903), 154-157, doi:10.1038/nature00983.   Phytoplankton photosynthesis parameters along 140°W in the equatorial Pacific  S  T  Lindley    R  R  Bidigare    R  T  Barber     Deep Sea Res. II  42  2-3    1995    Lindley, S. T., R. R. Bidigare, and R. T. Barber (1995), Phytoplankton photosynthesis parameters along 140°W in the equatorial Pacific, Deep Sea Res. II, 42(2-3), 441-463.   Light scattering and chlorophyll concentration in case 1 waters: A reexamination  H  Loisel    A  Morel     Limnol. Oceanogr  43  5    1998    Loisel, H., and A. Morel (1998), Light scattering and chlorophyll concentration in case 1 waters: A reexamination, Limnol. Oceanogr., 43(5), 847-858.   Seasonal and inter-annual variability of particulate organic matter in the global ocean  H  Loisel    J.-M  Nicolas    P.-Y  Deschamps    R  Frouin    doi:1029/2002GL015948   Geophys. Res. Lett  29  24  2196  2002    Loisel, H., J.-M. Nicolas, P.-Y. Deschamps, and R. Frouin (2002), Seasonal and inter-annual variability of particulate organic matter in the global ocean, Geophys. Res. Lett., 29(24), 2196, doi:1029/2002GL015948,.   Investigation of the optical backscattering to scattering ratio of marine particles in relation to their biogeochemical composition in the eastern English Channel and southern North Sea  H  Loisel    X  Mériaux    J.-F  Berthon    A  Poteau    10.4319/lo.2007.52.2.0739   Limnol. Oceanogr  52  2    2007    Loisel, H., X. Mériaux, J.-F. Berthon, and A. Poteau (2007), Investigation of the optical backscattering to scattering ratio of marine particles in relation to their biogeochemical composition in the eastern English Channel and southern North Sea, Limnol. Oceanogr., 52(2), 739-752, doi:10.4319/lo.2007.52.2.0739.   Characterization of the bio-optical anomaly and diurnal variability of particulate matter, as seen from scattering and backscattering coefficients, in ultra-oligotrophic eddies of the Mediterranean Sea  H  Loisel    10.5194/bg-8-3295-2011   Biogeosciences  8  11    2011    Loisel, H. et al. (2011), Characterization of the bio-optical anomaly and diurnal variability of particulate matter, as seen from scattering and backscattering coefficients, in ultra-oligotrophic eddies of the Mediterranean Sea, Biogeosciences, 8(11), 3295-3317, doi:10.5194/bg-8-3295-2011.   River discharges of water and nutrients to the Mediterranean and Black Sea: Major drivers for ecosystem changes during past and future decades?  W  Ludwig    E  Dumont    M  Meybeck    S  Heussner    10.1016/j.pocean.2009.02.001   Prog. Oceanogr  80  3-4    2009    Ludwig, W., E. Dumont, M. Meybeck, and S. Heussner (2009), River discharges of water and nutrients to the Mediterranean and Black Sea: Major drivers for ecosystem changes during past and future decades?, Prog. Oceanogr., 80(3-4), 199- 217, doi:10.1016/j.pocean.2009.02.001.   Variability in pigment composition and optical characteristics of phytoplankton in the Labrador Sea and the Central North Atlantic  V  A  Lutz    S  Sathyendranath    E  J H  Head    W  K W  Li    10.3354/meps260001   Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser  260    2003    Lutz, V. A., S. Sathyendranath, E. J. H. Head, and W. K. W. Li (2003), Variability in pigment composition and optical characteristics of phytoplankton in the Labrador Sea and the Central North Atlantic, Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser., 260, 1-18, doi:10.3354/meps260001.   Photocclimation of photosynthesis irradiance response curves and photosynthetic pigments in microalgae and cyanobacteria  H  L  Macintyre    T  M  Kana    T  Anning    R  J  Geider    10.1046/j.1529-8817.2002.00094.x   J. Phycol  38  1    2002    MacIntyre, H. L., T. M. Kana, T. Anning, and R. J. Geider (2002), Photocclimation of photosynthesis irradiance response curves and photosynthetic pigments in microalgae and cyanobacteria, J. Phycol., 38(1), 17-38, doi:10.1046/j.1529- 8817.2002.00094.x.   Optimization of a semianalytical ocean color model for global-scale applications  S  Maritorena    D  Siegel    A  R  Peterson    10.1364/AO.41.002705   Appl. Opt  41  15    2002    Maritorena, S., D. a Siegel, and A. R. Peterson (2002), Optimization of a semianalytical ocean color model for global-scale applications., Appl. Opt., 41(15), 2705-2714, doi:10.1364/AO.41.002705.   Hydrological changes in the Ligurian Sea (NW Mediterranean, DYFAMED site) during 1995-2007 and biogeochemical consequences  J  C  Marty    J  Chiavérini    10.5194/bg-7-2117-2010   Biogeosciences  7  7    2010    Marty, J. C., and J. Chiavérini (2010), Hydrological changes in the Ligurian Sea (NW Mediterranean, DYFAMED site) during 1995-2007 and biogeochemical consequences, Biogeosciences, 7(7), 2117-2128, doi:10.5194/bg-7-2117-2010.   Interannual variability of the Mediterranean trophic regimes from ocean color satellites  N  Mayot    F  D'ortenzio    M  R  D'alcalà    H  Lavigne    H  Claustre    10.5194/bg-13-1901-2016   Biogeosciences  13  6    2016    Mayot, N., F. D'Ortenzio, M. R. D'Alcalà, H. Lavigne, and H. Claustre (2016), Interannual variability of the Mediterranean trophic regimes from ocean color satellites, Biogeosciences, 13(6), 1901-1917, doi:10.5194/bg-13-1901-2016.   Cross-front phytoplankton pigments and chemotaxonomic groups in the Indian sector of the Southern Ocean  C  R B  Mendes    R  Kerr    V  M  Tavano    F  A  Cavalheiro    C  A E  Garcia    D  R G  Dessai    N  Anilkumar    10.1016/j.dsr2.2015.01.003   Deep Sea Res  II    2015    Mendes, C. R. B., R. Kerr, V. M. Tavano, F. A. Cavalheiro, C. A. E. Garcia, D. R. G. Dessai, and N. Anilkumar (2015), Cross-front phytoplankton pigments and chemotaxonomic groups in the Indian sector of the Southern Ocean, Deep Sea Res. II, 1-12, doi:10.1016/j.dsr2.2015.01.003.   Understanding theseasonal dynamics of phytoplankton biomass and the deep chlorophyll maximum in oligotrophic environments: A Bio-Argo float investigation  A  Mignot    H  Claustre    J  Uitz    A  Poteau    F  D  Ortenzio    X  Xing    10.1002/2013GB004781   Global Biogeochem. Cycles  28  8    2014    Mignot, A., H. Claustre, J. Uitz, A. Poteau, F. D. Ortenzio, and X. Xing (2014), Understanding theseasonal dynamics of phytoplankton biomass and the deep chlorophyll maximum in oligotrophic environments: A Bio-Argo float investigation, Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 28(8), 1-21, doi:10.1002/2013GB004781.   Predictive bio-optical relationships for polar oceans and marginal ice zones  B  G  Mitchell    10.1016/0924-7963(92)90032-4   J. Mar. Syst  3  1-2    1992    Mitchell, B. G. (1992), Predictive bio-optical relationships for polar oceans and marginal ice zones, J. Mar. Syst., 3(1-2), 91- 105, doi:10.1016/0924-7963(92)90032-4.   Bio-optical properties of Antarctic Peninsula waters: differentiation from temperate ocean models  B  G  Mitchell    O  Holm-Hansen    10.1016/0198-0149(91)90094-V   Deep Sea Res  38  8-9    1991    Mitchell, B. G., and O. Holm-Hansen (1991), Bio-optical properties of Antarctic Peninsula waters: differentiation from temperate ocean models, Deep Sea Res., 38(8-9), 1009-1028, doi:10.1016/0198-0149(91)90094-V.   Optics of heterotrophic nanoftagellates and ciliates: A tentative assessment of their scattering role in oceanic waters compared to those of bacterial and algal cells  A  Morel    Y  Ahn     J. Mar. Res  49    1991    Morel, A., and Y. Ahn (1991), Optics of heterotrophic nanoftagellates and ciliates: A tentative assessment of their scattering role in oceanic waters compared to those of bacterial and algal cells, J. Mar. Res., 49, 177-202.   Surface pigments, algal biomass profiles, and potential production of the euphotic layer: Relationships reinvestigated in view of remote-sensing applications  A  Morel    J.-F  Berthon    10.4319/lo.1989.34.8.1545   Limnol. Oceanogr  34  8    1989    Morel, A., and J.-F. Berthon (1989), Surface pigments, algal biomass profiles, and potential production of the euphotic layer: Relationships reinvestigated in view of remote-sensing applications, Limnol. Oceanogr., 34(8), 1545-1562, doi:10.4319/lo.1989.34.8.1545.   Inherent optical properties of algal cells including picoplankton: Theorical and experimental results  A  Morel    A  Bricaud     Can. Bull. Fish. Aquat. Sci  214    1986    Morel, A., and A. Bricaud (1986), Inherent optical properties of algal cells including picoplankton: Theorical and experimental results, Can. Bull. Fish. Aquat. Sci., 214, 521-559.   Bio-optical properties of oceanic waters: A reappraisal  A  Morel    S  Maritorena    10.1029/2000JC000319   J. Geophys. Res  106  C4  7163  2001    Morel, A., and S. Maritorena (2001), Bio-optical properties of oceanic waters: A reappraisal, J. Geophys. Res., 106(C4), 7163, doi:10.1029/2000JC000319.   Natural variability of bio-optical properties in Case 1 waters: attenuation and reflectance within the visible and near-UV spectral domains, as observed in South Pacific and Mediterranean waters  A  Morel    H  Claustre    D  Antoine    B  Gentili    10.5194/bgd-4-2147-2007   Biogeosciences  4  4    2007    Morel, A., H. Claustre, D. Antoine, and B. Gentili (2007), Natural variability of bio-optical properties in Case 1 waters: attenuation and reflectance within the visible and near-UV spectral domains, as observed in South Pacific and Mediterranean waters, Biogeosciences, 4(4), 913-925, doi:10.5194/bgd-4-2147-2007.   Identification of dominant phytoplankton functional types in the Mediterranean Sea based on a regionalized remote sensing approach  G  Navarro    S  Alvain    V  Vantrepotte    I  E  Huertas    10.1016/j.rse.2014.06.029   Remote Sens. Environ  152    2014    Navarro, G., S. Alvain, V. Vantrepotte, and I. E. Huertas (2014), Identification of dominant phytoplankton functional types in the Mediterranean Sea based on a regionalized remote sensing approach, Remote Sens. Environ., 152, 557-575, doi:10.1016/j.rse.2014.06.029.   A global bio-optical database derived from Biogeochemical Argo float measurements within the layer of interest for field and remote ocean colour applications  E  Organelli    M  Barbieux    H  Claustre    C  Schmechtig    A  Poteau    A  Bricaud    J  Uitz    F  D'ortenzio    G  Dall    Olmo    10.17882/47142   SEANOE  2016    Organelli, E., M. Barbieux, H. Claustre, C. Schmechtig, A. Poteau, A. Bricaud, J. Uitz, F. D'Ortenzio, and G. Dall'Olmo (2016a), A global bio-optical database derived from Biogeochemical Argo float measurements within the layer of interest for field and remote ocean colour applications, SEANOE, doi:10.17882/47142.   A novel near real-time quality-control procedure for radiometric profiles measured by Bio-Argo floats: protocols and performances  E  Organelli    H  Claustre    A  Bricaud    C  Schmechtig    A  Poteau    X  Xing    L  Prieur    F  D'ortenzio    G  Dall'olmo    V  Vellucci    10.1175/JTECH-D-15-0193   J. Atmos. Ocean. Technol  33    2016    Organelli, E., H. Claustre, A. Bricaud, C. Schmechtig, A. Poteau, X. Xing, L. Prieur, F. D'Ortenzio, G. Dall'Olmo, and V. Vellucci (2016b), A novel near real-time quality-control procedure for radiometric profiles measured by Bio-Argo floats: protocols and performances, J. Atmos. Ocean. Technol., 33, 937-951, doi:10.1175/JTECH-D-15-0193.   Bio-optical anomalies in the world's oceans: An investigation on the diffuse attenuation coefficients for downward irradiance derived fromBiogeochemical Argo float measurements  E  Organelli    F  D'ortenzio    H  Claustre    A  Bricaud    M  Barbieux    J  Uitz    G  Dall    Olmo    10.1002/2016JC012629   J. Geophys. Res. Ocean  122    2017    Organelli, E., F. D'Ortenzio, H. Claustre, A. Bricaud, M. Barbieux, J. Uitz, and G. Dall'Olmo (2017a), Bio-optical anomalies in the world's oceans: An investigation on the diffuse attenuation coefficients for downward irradiance derived fromBiogeochemical Argo float measurements, J. Geophys. Res. Ocean., 122, 2017-2033, doi:doi:10.1002/2016JC012629.   Two databases derived from BGC-Argo float measurements for marine biogeochemical and biooptical applications  E  Organelli    10.5194/essd-2017-58     Earth Syst. Sci. Data  9    2017    Organelli, E. et al. (2017b), Two databases derived from BGC-Argo float measurements for marine biogeochemical and bio- optical applications, Earth Syst. Sci. Data, 9, 861-880, doi:https://doi.org/10.5194/essd-2017-58.   Bio-optical and biogeochemical properties of different trophic regimes in oceanic waters  K  Oubelkheir    H  Claustre    A  Sciandra    M  Babin    10.4319/lo.2005.50.6.1795   Limnol. Oceanogr  50  6    2005    Oubelkheir, K., H. Claustre, A. Sciandra, and M. Babin (2005), Bio-optical and biogeochemical properties of different trophic regimes in oceanic waters, Limnol. Oceanogr., 50(6), 1795-1809, doi:10.4319/lo.2005.50.6.1795.   New insights on obtaining phytoplankton concentration and composition from in situ multispectral Chlorophyll fluorescence  C  W  Proctor    C  S  Roesler    10.4319/lom.2010.8.0695   Limnol. Oceanogr. Methods  8  12    2010    Proctor, C. W., and C. S. Roesler (2010), New insights on obtaining phytoplankton concentration and composition from in situ multispectral Chlorophyll fluorescence, Limnol. Oceanogr. Methods, 8(12), 695-708, doi:10.4319/lom.2010.8.0695.   The Atmospheric Transport of Particles to the Ocean, Scope-scientific  J  M  Prospero     Comm. Probl. Environ. Int. Counc. Sci. unions  57    1996    Prospero, J. M. (1996), The Atmospheric Transport of Particles to the Ocean, Scope-scientific Comm. Probl. Environ. Int. Counc. Sci. unions, 57, 19-52.   Spatial variability of phytoplankton pigment distributions in the Subtropical South Pacific Ocean: comparison between in situ and predicted data  J  Ras    H  Claustre    J  Uitz    10.5194/bgd-4-3409-2007   Biogeosciences  5    2008    Ras, J., H. Claustre, and J. Uitz (2008), Spatial variability of phytoplankton pigment distributions in the Subtropical South Pacific Ocean: comparison between in situ and predicted data, Biogeosciences, 5, 353-369, doi:10.5194/bgd-4-3409- 2007.   A chlorophyll-dependent semianalytical reflectance model derived from field measurements of absorption and backscattering coefficients within the Southern Ocean  R  Reynolds    D  Stramski    B  G  Mitchell    10.1029/1999JC000311   J. Geophys. Res  106  C4    2001    Reynolds, R. a., D. Stramski, and B. G. Mitchell (2001), A chlorophyll-dependent semianalytical reflectance model derived from field measurements of absorption and backscattering coefficients within the Southern Ocean, J. Geophys. Res., 106(C4), 7125-7138, doi:10.1029/1999JC000311.   Net production of oxygen in the subtropical ocean  S  C  Riser    K  S  Johnson    10.1038/nature06441   Nature  451  7176    2008    Riser, S. C., and K. S. Johnson (2008), Net production of oxygen in the subtropical ocean., Nature, 451(7176), 323-325, doi:10.1038/nature06441.   Recommendations for obtaining unbiased chlorophyll estimates from in situ chlorophyll fluorometers: A global analysis of WET Labs ECO sensors  C  Roesler    10.1002/lom3.10185   Limnol. Oceanogr. Methods  15  6    2017    Roesler, C. et al. (2017), Recommendations for obtaining unbiased chlorophyll estimates from in situ chlorophyll fluorometers: A global analysis of WET Labs ECO sensors, Limnol. Oceanogr. Methods, 15(6), 572-585, doi:10.1002/lom3.10185.   Optical proxy for phytoplankton biomass in the absence of photophysiology: Rethinking the absorption line height  C  S  Roesler    A  H  Barnard    10.1016/j.mio.2013.12.003   Methods Oceanogr  7    2013    Roesler, C. S., and A. H. Barnard (2013), Optical proxy for phytoplankton biomass in the absence of photophysiology: Rethinking the absorption line height, Methods Oceanogr., 7, 79-94, doi:10.1016/j.mio.2013.12.003.   Spatio-temporal variability of micro-, nano-and picophytoplankton in the Mediterranean Sea from satellite ocean colour data of SeaWiFS  M  Sammartino    A  Di Cicco    S  Marullo    R  Santoleri    10.5194/os-11-759-2015   Ocean Sci  11    2015    Sammartino, M., A. Di Cicco, S. Marullo, and R. Santoleri (2015), Spatio-temporal variability of micro-, nano-and pico- phytoplankton in the Mediterranean Sea from satellite ocean colour data of SeaWiFS, Ocean Sci., 11, 759-778, doi:10.5194/os-11-759-2015.   Carbonto-chlorophyll ratio and growth rate of phytoplankton in the sea  S  Sathyendranath    V  Stuart    A  Nair    K  Oka    T  Nakane    H  Bouman    M  H  Forget    H  Maass    T  Platt    10.3354/meps07998   Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser  383    2009    Sathyendranath, S., V. Stuart, A. Nair, K. Oka, T. Nakane, H. Bouman, M. H. Forget, H. Maass, and T. Platt (2009), Carbon- to-chlorophyll ratio and growth rate of phytoplankton in the sea, Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser., 383, 73-84, doi:10.3354/meps07998.   Bio-Argo quality control manual for the Chlorophyll-A concentration  C  Schmechtig    H  Claustre    A  Poteau    F  D  Ortenzio    10.13155/35385   Argo Data Manag    2014    Schmechtig, C., H. Claustre, A. Poteau, and F. D'Ortenzio (2014), Bio-Argo quality control manual for the Chlorophyll-A concentration, Argo Data Manag., 1-13, doi:doi:10.13155/35385.   Processing Bio-Argo particle backscattering at the DAC level Version  C  Schmechtig    A  Poteau    H  Claustre    F  D'ortenzio    G  Dall'olmo    E  Boss    10.13155/39459   Argo Data Manag    2016    Schmechtig, C., A. Poteau, H. Claustre, F. D'Ortenzio, G. Dall'Olmo, and E. Boss (2016), Processing Bio-Argo particle backscattering at the DAC level Version, Argo Data Manag., 1-13, doi:doi:10.13155/39459.   Independence and interdependencies among global ocean color properties: Reassessing the bio-optical assumption  D  A  Siegel    S  Maritorena    N  B  Nelson    M  J  Behrenfeld    10.1029/2004JC002527   J. Geophys. Res. C Ocean  110  7    2005    Siegel, D. A., S. Maritorena, N. B. Nelson, and M. J. Behrenfeld (2005), Independence and interdependencies among global ocean color properties: Reassessing the bio-optical assumption, J. Geophys. Res. C Ocean., 110(7), 1-14, doi:10.1029/2004JC002527.   Regional to global assessments of phytoplankton dynamics from the SeaWiFS mission  D  A  Siegel    10.1016/j.rse.2013.03.025   Remote Sens. Environ  135    2013    Siegel, D. A. et al. (2013), Regional to global assessments of phytoplankton dynamics from the SeaWiFS mission, Remote Sens. Environ., 135, 77-91, doi:10.1016/j.rse.2013.03.025.   Plankton in the open Mediterranean Sea: a review  I  Siokou-Frangou    U  Christaki    M  G  Mazzocchi    M  Montresor    M  Ribera D'alcalá    D  Vaqué    Zingone    10.5194/bg-7-1543-2010   Biogeosciences  7  5    2010    Siokou-Frangou, I., U. Christaki, M. G. Mazzocchi, M. Montresor, M. Ribera d'Alcalá, D. Vaqué, and a. Zingone (2010), Plankton in the open Mediterranean Sea: a review, Biogeosciences, 7(5), 1543-1586, doi:10.5194/bg-7-1543-2010.   Optical classification of natural waters  R  C  Smith    K  S  Baker    10.4319/lo.1978.23.2.0260   Limnol. Oceanogr  23  2    1978    Smith, R. C., and K. S. Baker (1978a), Optical classification of natural waters, Limnol. Oceanogr., 23(2), 260-267, doi:10.4319/lo.1978.23.2.0260.   The bio-optical state of ocean waters and remote sensing  R  C  Smith    K  S  Baker    10.4319/lo.1978.23.2.0247   Limnol. Oceanogr  23  2    1978    Smith, R. C., and K. S. Baker (1978b), The bio-optical state of ocean waters and remote sensing, Limnol. Oceanogr., 23(2), 247-259, doi:10.4319/lo.1978.23.2.0247.   Photoacclimation of four marine phytoplankton species to irradiance and nutrient availability  P  A  Staehr    P  Henriksen    S  Markager    10.3354/meps238047   Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser  238    2002    Staehr, P. A., P. Henriksen, and S. Markager (2002), Photoacclimation of four marine phytoplankton species to irradiance and nutrient availability, Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser., 238, 47-59, doi:10.3354/meps238047.   Bio-optical relationships and ocean color algorithms for the north polar region of the Atlantic  M  Stramska    D  Stramski    R  Hapter    S  Kaczmarek    J  Ston    10.1029/2001JC001195   J. Geophys. Res  108  C5    2003    Stramska, M., D. Stramski, R. Hapter, S. Kaczmarek, and J. Ston (2003), Bio-optical relationships and ocean color algorithms for the north polar region of the Atlantic, J. Geophys. Res., 108(C5), 2156-2202, doi:10.1029/2001JC001195.   Estimation of Particulate Organic Carbon in the Ocean from Satellite Remote Sensing  D  Stramski    R  A  Reynolds    M  Kahru    B  G  Mitchell    D  Stramski    R  A  Reynolds    M  Kahru    B  G  Mitchell     Science  80  5425    1999    Stramski, D., R. A. Reynolds, M. Kahru, B. G. Mitchell, D. Stramski, R. A. Reynolds, M. Kahru, and B. G. Mitchell (1999), Estimation of Particulate Organic Carbon in the Ocean from Satellite Remote Sensing, Science (80-. )., 285(5425), 239-242.   Modeling the inherent optical properties of the ocean based on the detailed composition of the planktonic community  D  Stramski    A  Bricaud    A  Morel    10.1364/AO.40.002929   Appl. Opt  40  18    2001    Stramski, D., A. Bricaud, and A. Morel (2001), Modeling the inherent optical properties of the ocean based on the detailed composition of the planktonic community, Appl. Opt., 40(18), 2929-2945, doi:10.1364/AO.40.002929.   The role of seawater constituents in light backscattering in the ocean  D  Stramski    E  Boss    D  Bogucki    K  J  Voss    10.1016/j.pocean.2004.07.001   Prog. Oceanogr  61  1    2004    Stramski, D., E. Boss, D. Bogucki, and K. J. Voss (2004), The role of seawater constituents in light backscattering in the ocean, Prog. Oceanogr., 61(1), 27-56, doi:10.1016/j.pocean.2004.07.001.   Relationships between the surface concentration of particulate organic carbon and optical properties in the eastern South Pacific and eastern Atlantic Oceans  D  Stramski    10.5194/bg-5-171-2008   Biogeosciences  5  1    2008    Stramski, D. et al. (2008), Relationships between the surface concentration of particulate organic carbon and optical properties in the eastern South Pacific and eastern Atlantic Oceans, Biogeosciences, 5(1), 171-201, doi:10.5194/bg-5- 171-2008.   Measuring optical backscattering in water  J  Sullivan    M  S  Twardowski    J  Ronald    V  Zaneveld    C  C  Moore     Light Scattering Reviews  A  A  Kokhanovsky    Berlin    Springer  2013  7      Sullivan, J., M. S. Twardowski, J. Ronald, V. Zaneveld, and C. C. Moore (2013), Measuring optical backscattering in water, in Light Scattering Reviews 7, edited by A. A. Kokhanovsky, pp. 189-224, Springer, Berlin.   Are the world's oceans optically different?  M  Szeto    P  J  Werdell    T  S  Moore    J  W  Campbell    10.1029/2011JC007230   J. Geophys. Res  116  C7    2011    Szeto, M., P. J. Werdell, T. S. Moore, and J. W. Campbell (2011), Are the world's oceans optically different?, J. Geophys. Res., 116(C7), C00H04, doi:10.1029/2011JC007230.   The Mediterranean Sea system: a review and an introduction to the special issue  T  Tanhua    D  Hainbucher    K  Schroeder    V  Cardin    M  Álvarez    G  Civitarese    10.5194/os-9-789-2013   Ocean Sci  9  5    2013    Tanhua, T., D. Hainbucher, K. Schroeder, V. Cardin, M. Álvarez, and G. Civitarese (2013), The Mediterranean Sea system: a review and an introduction to the special issue, Ocean Sci., 9(5), 789-803, doi:10.5194/os-9-789-2013.   Buoyancy and Wind-Driven Convection at Mixed Layer Density Fronts  J  R  Taylor    R  Ferrari    10.1175/2010JPO4365   J. Phys. Oceanogr  40  6    2010    Taylor, J. R., and R. Ferrari (2010), Buoyancy and Wind-Driven Convection at Mixed Layer Density Fronts, J. Phys. Oceanogr., 40(6), 1222-1242, doi:10.1175/2010JPO4365.   Vertical distribution of phytoplankton communities in open ocean: An assessment based on surface chlorophyll  J  Uitz    H  Claustre    A  Morel    S  B  Hooker    10.1029/2005JC003207   J. Geophys. Res  111  8005  2006    Uitz, J., H. Claustre, A. Morel, and S. B. Hooker (2006), Vertical distribution of phytoplankton communities in open ocean: An assessment based on surface chlorophyll, J. Geophys. Res., 111, C08005, doi:10.1029/2005JC003207.   A phytoplankton class-specific primary production model applied to the Kerguelen Islands region (Southern Ocean)  J  Uitz    H  Claustre    F  B  Griffiths    J  Ras    N  Garcia    V  Sandroni    10.1016/j.dsr.2008.11.006   Deep Sea Res. I  56  4    2009    Uitz, J., H. Claustre, F. B. Griffiths, J. Ras, N. Garcia, and V. Sandroni (2009), A phytoplankton class-specific primary production model applied to the Kerguelen Islands region (Southern Ocean), Deep Sea Res. I, 56(4), 541-560, doi:10.1016/j.dsr.2008.11.006.   Light backscattering properties of marine phytoplankton: relationships to cell size, chemical composition and taxonomy  R  D  Vaillancourt    C  W  Brown    R  R L  Guillard    W  M  Balch    10.1093/plankt/fbh012   J. Plankton Res  26  2    2004    Vaillancourt, R. D., C. W. Brown, R. R. L. Guillard, and W. M. Balch (2004), Light backscattering properties of marine phytoplankton: relationships to cell size, chemical composition and taxonomy, J. Plankton Res., 26(2), 191-212, doi:10.1093/plankt/fbh012.   Ocean Carbon Pumps: Analysis of relative strengths and efficiencies in ocean-driven atmospheric C02 changes  T  Volk    M  I  Hoffert    ;  L  Sarmiento    D  A  Siegel    10.1002/2015GB005276   The Carbon Cycle and Atmospheric CO₂: Natural Variations Archean to Present  E  T  Sundquist    W  S  Broecker    Geophysical Monograph  1985. 2016  32      Annual cycles of phytoplankton biomass in the subarctic Atlantic and Pacific Ocean  Volk, T., and M. I. Hoffert (1985), Ocean Carbon Pumps: Analysis of relative strengths and efficiencies in ocean-driven atmospheric C02 changes, in The Carbon Cycle and Atmospheric CO₂: Natural Variations Archean to Present, vol. 32, edited by E. T. Sundquist and W. S. Broecker, pp. 99-110, Geophysical Monograph Series, Washington, D. C. Westberry, T. K., M. J. Behrenfeld, P. Schultz, J. P. Dunne, M. R. Hiscock, S. Maritorena, J. L. Sarmiento, and D. A. Siegel (2016), Annual cycles of phytoplankton biomass in the subarctic Atlantic and Pacific Ocean, Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 30(2), 175-190, doi:10.1002/2015GB005276.   Spectral backscattering properties of marine phytoplankton cultures  A  L  Whitmire    W  S  Pegau    L  Karp-Boss    E  Boss    T  J  Cowles    10.1029/2003RG000148   Opt. Express  18  14    2010    Whitmire, A. L., W. S. Pegau, L. Karp-Boss, E. Boss, and T. J. Cowles (2010), Spectral backscattering properties of marine phytoplankton cultures, Opt. Express, 18(14), 15073-15093, doi:10.1029/2003RG000148.     D       D.   Seasonal variability in the phytoplankton community of the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre  C  D  Winn    L  Campbell    J  R  Christian    R  M  Letelier    D  Hebel    J  E  Dore    L  Fujieki    D  M  Karl    10.1029/95gb02149   Global Biogeochem. Cycles  9  4    1995    Winn, C. D., L. Campbell, J. R. Christian, R. M. Letelier, D. V Hebel, J. E. Dore, L. Fujieki, and D. M. Karl (1995), Seasonal variability in the phytoplankton community of the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre, Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 9(4), 605-620, doi:10.1029/95gb02149.   Argo quality control manual  A  Wong    R  Keeley    T  Carval    10.13155/33951   Argo Data Manag    2013    Wong, A., R. Keeley, and T. Carval (2013), Argo quality control manual, Argo Data Manag., 1-50, doi:doi:10.13155/33951.   Combined processing and mutual interpretation of radiometry and fluorimetry from autonomous profiling Bio-Argo floats: Chlorophyll a retrieval  X  Xing    A  Morel    H  Claustre    D  Antoine    F  D'ortenzio    A  Poteau    A  Mignot    10.1029/2010JC006899   J. Geophys. Res  116  C6  6020  2011    Xing, X., A. Morel, H. Claustre, D. Antoine, F. D'Ortenzio, A. Poteau, and A. Mignot (2011), Combined processing and mutual interpretation of radiometry and fluorimetry from autonomous profiling Bio-Argo floats: Chlorophyll a retrieval, J. Geophys. Res., 116(C6), C06020, doi:10.1029/2010JC006899.   Quenching correction for in vivo chlorophyll fluorescence acquired by autonomous platforms: A case study with instrumented elephant seals in the Kerguelen region (Southern Ocean)  X  Xing    H  Claustre    S  Blain    F  D'ortenzio    D  Antoine    J  Ras    C  Guinet    10.4319/lom.2012.10.483   Limnol. Oceanogr  10    2012    Xing, X., H. Claustre, S. Blain, F. D'Ortenzio, D. Antoine, J. Ras, and C. Guinet (2012), Quenching correction for in vivo chlorophyll fluorescence acquired by autonomous platforms: A case study with instrumented elephant seals in the Kerguelen region (Southern Ocean), Limnol. Oceanogr., 10, 483-495, doi:10.4319/lom.2012.10.483.   Seasonal variations of bio-optical properties and their interrelationships observed by Bio-Argo floats in the subpolar North Atlantic  X  Xing    H  Claustre    J  Uitz    A  Mignot    A  Poteau    H  Wang    10.1002/2014JC010189   J. Geophys. Res  119    2014    Xing, X., H. Claustre, J. Uitz, A. Mignot, A. Poteau, and H. Wang (2014), Seasonal variations of bio-optical properties and their interrelationships observed by Bio-Argo floats in the subpolar North Atlantic, J. Geophys. Res., 119, 1-17, doi:10.1002/2014JC010189.   Correction of profiles of in-situ chlorophyll fluorometry for the contribution of fluorescence originating from non-algal matter  X  Xing    H  Claustre    E  Boss    C  Roesler    E  Organelli    A  Poteau    M  Barbieux    F  D  Ortenzio    10.1002/lom3.10144   Limnol. Oceanogr. Methods  15  1    2016    Xing, X., H. Claustre, E. Boss, C. Roesler, E. Organelli, A. Poteau, M. Barbieux, and F. D'Ortenzio (2016), Correction of profiles of in-situ chlorophyll fluorometry for the contribution of fluorescence originating from non-algal matter, Limnol. Oceanogr. Methods, 15(1), 80-93, doi:10.1002/lom3.10144.   A bridge between ocean optics and microbial ecology  C  S  Yentsch    D  A  Phinney    10.4319/lo.1989.34.8.1694   Limnol. Oceanogr  34  8    1989    Yentsch, C. S., and D. a. Phinney (1989), A bridge between ocean optics and microbial ecology, Limnol. Oceanogr., 34(8), 1694-1705, doi:10.4319/lo.1989.34.8.1694.   Scattering by pure seawater: Effect of salinity  X  Zhang    L  Hu    M.-X  He    10.1364/OE.17.012685   Opt. Express  17  7    2009    Zhang, X., L. Hu, and M.-X. He (2009), Scattering by pure seawater: Effect of salinity, Opt. Express, 17(7), 5698-5710, doi:10.1364/OE.17.012685.   

     