Journal of South American Earth Sciences 116 (2022) 103824
Available online 27 April 2022
0895-9811/© 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Inventory of large landslides along the Central Western Andes (ca. 15◦–20◦
S): Landslide distribution patterns and insights on controlling factors 
Fabrizio Delgado a,b, Swann Zerathe b,*, St´ephane Schwartz b, Bastien Mathieux b, 
Carlos Benavente a,c 
a Especialidad Ingeniería Geol´ogica, Facultad de Ciencias e Ingeniería. Pontificia Universidad Cat´olica del Perú, Av. Universitaria 1801, San Miguel, Lima, 15088, Peru 
b Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Univ. Savoie Mont Blanc, CNRS, IRD, IFSTTAR, ISTerre, 38000, Grenoble, France 
c Instituto Geol´ogico, Minero y Metalúrgico INGEMMET, Av. Canad´a, 1470, Lima, Peru   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Central Western Andes 
Atacama desert 
Large landslides 
Inventory 
Controlling factors 
A B S T R A C T   
The western flank of the Central Andes hosts some of the largest terrestrial landslides (v > km3), which mor­
phologies are particularly well-preserved due to low erosion rates related to the hyper-arid climate prevailing in 
this region since the Miocene. First-order questions are pending about the factors controlling the development 
and the triggering of those large-scale slope failures. Previous studies provided some geomorphological analysis 
and dating on individual study cases, but a regional-scale vision of landslide processes long the Central Western 
Andes is missing. 
Here we report an original inventory of large landslides (areas from 0.1 to 180 km2) established along the 
western flank of the Central Andes between latitudes ca. 15 and 20◦S, and from the Pacific coast to the Altiplano. 
Based on manual mapping (using satellite images analysis, Google Earth and DEMs analysis) and a compilation of 
previous works, we inventoried more than a thousand large landslides in this region. We then statistically 
explored the database according to the landslides typology, size, abundance and relation to geologic, tectonic 
and climatic settings of the Central Western Andes in order to provide a first insight on their controlling factors. 
Landslide size-frequency distribution follows a power-law with an exponent of 2.31 ± 0.16 and a cut-off of 4.0 ±
1.9 km2 showing a strong contribution of the largest landslides to the cumulated landslide area. We revealed a 
dominance of rockslide typology (86%) characterized by in-mass slides, the rest being rock-avalanche type (14%) 
marked by typical granular-flow morphologies. Combination of specific lithology and great local relief emerge as 
favorable conditioning factor for large landslide initiation, in particular in the case of river incisions though 
ignimbrites of the Paleogene-Neogene (Huaylillas Formation), concentrating >30% of the landslides. Moreover, 
landslide clusters tend to follow crustal faults networks suggesting a long-term control of tectonic activity. Most 
of the identified landslides are paleo events. We tentatively argue that their triggering could not have been 
possible in the current hyper-arid conditions of the Atacama Desert and its periphery. Future research providing 
dating on some of the landslide clusters identified in this study is needed to explore possible temporal correla­
tions between periods of landslide activity and external seismic and/or climatic cycles.   
1. Introduction 
Landslides are ubiquitous gravity phenomena on Earth, found in any 
environment with slopes. Their triggering is conditioned by the internal 
mechanical and hydrological properties of geomaterials (Guzzetti et al., 
1996; Stead and Wolter, 2015), and may depend on external factors 
associated with seismotectonic activity (Fan et al., 2019) or climatic 
variations (P´anek, 2019). They constitute one of the major sources of 
hazard, responsible for thousands of victims and billions of dollars in 
damages each year (Petley, 2012; Froude and Petley, 2018; Wallemacq 
and House, 2018). The constant growth of the world population asso­
ciated with the ongoing climate changes are factors that may severely 
increase the level of risk and hazard related to landslide activity (Gar­
iano et Gariano and Guzzetti, 2016; Haque et al., 2019). In this context, 
a better understanding of landslide processes and their causative factors 
is crucial and those questions have received a growing interest (Wu 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: swann.zerathe@ird.fr (S. Zerathe).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Journal of South American Earth Sciences 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jsames 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsames.2022.103824 
Received 2 November 2021; Received in revised form 9 March 2022; Accepted 19 April 2022   
Journal of South American Earth Sciences 116 (2022) 103824
2
et al., 2015). On longer timescales, landslides are recognized as the main 
erosional process in orogenic zones (e.g. Korup et al., 2007). Landslide 
rate is thought to mirror the long-term trend of tectonic uplift, land­
sliding continuously affecting steep slopes along the valley flanks of 
incising rivers (Larsen and Montgomery, 2012). Doing so, landslides are 
the main agent transporting material from hillslopes to rivers and 
limiting the elevation and the relief construction in mountain ranges 
(Whipple et al., 1999; Montgomery, 2001; Roering, 2012). 
To disentangle hazard issues and to progress toward a better un­
derstanding of landslides processes, research strategies based on land­
slide inventories have shown interesting potential (Malamud et al., 
2004; Guzzetti et al., 2012). Numerous landslide inventories have been 
built after single storm events or strong earthquakes, using remote 
sensing approaches to detect the triggered landslides (see reviews in 
Marc et al. (2018) and Tanyas¸ et al. (2017), for rainfall-induced and 
earthquake-induced landslide inventories, respectively). Providing sta­
tistics on landslide processes, those inventories can highlight specific 
patterns and reveal generic landslide properties, such as the 
earthquake-induced landslide size decreasing with distance from the 
fault trace (Valagussa et al., 2019), the control of relief on landslide size 
(Medwedeff et al., 2020) or the influence of total rainstorm on the 
proportion of large landslides (Marc et al., 2018). However, deciphering 
landslides patterns on a longer time scale (hundreds to thousands of 
years) and at a large spatial scale is more complex because erosion 
continuously removes the geomorphological evidence of past events. 
Furthermore, automatic detection of past landslides in landscapes is not 
efficient at present-day and establishing paleo landslides inventory re­
quires a manual mapping based on expert vision (e.g. P´anek et al., 2019; 
G¨orum, 2019). Those inventories allow to understand the relations be­
tween large landslides and relief properties at an orogenic scale and to 
unravel the respective effects of long-term seismotectonic activity and 
Quaternary climate changes on slope instabilities. 
In this study, we focus on large landslides along the western flank of 
the Central Andes between ca. 15◦and 20◦S, in both south Peru and 
north Chile, and we aim at establishing a comprehensive inventory of 
landslides in this area. This region is an atypical place for several as­
pects. First, it is particularly active geodynamically, related to the long- 
term convergence between the Nazca and the South America plates 
(Armijo et al., 2015; Martinod et al., 2020). This global shortening 
generates relief construction (Martinod et al., 2020) and produces 
instantaneous deformation (subduction and crustal seismicity; Ville­
gas-Lanza et al., 2016) coupled with long-term processes of surface 
uplift (Thouret et al., 2017) and volcanism (Mamani et al., 2009). Sec­
ond, the climate of this region is specific, with some places being one the 
driest worldwide: referred to as the Atacama Desert in Northern Chile 
and Southern Peru (Hartley and Chong, 2002). This desert, where a 
hyper-arid climate has been maintained for several millions of years (e. 
g. Hartley and Chong, 2002; Dunai et al., 2005) is often referred to as a 
Martian proxy (Valdivia-Silva et al., 2011; Irwin et al., 2014). The 
long-term aridity is responsible for very low erosion and weathering 
rates (1–10 mm kyr−1; Nishiizumi et al., 2005), allowing for excep­
tionally long preservation of landscapes and offering a unique time 
window to study slope instabilities at geological time scales. At the same 
time, strong storms can episodically occur during El Ni˜no event. Finally, 
the western flank of the Central Andes hosts some of the largest land­
slides ever identified on the emerged Earth surface (e.g. Chuquibamba 
(Margirier et al., 2015), Caquilluco (Crosta et al., 2015), Lluta (Strasser 
and Schlunegger, 2005), mobilizing volumes of several cubic kilometers, 
with kilometric long run-outs, similar to those reported on the Mars 
surface (Lucas et al., 2014). Some previous studies have been conducted 
on those individual slope failures, revealing that the instabilities are 
ancient with ages ranging from tens to hundreds of thousands of years 
(Zerathe al., 2017; Crosta et al., 2017; Delgado et al., 2020; 
S´anchez-Nú˜nez et al., 2020). However, questions remain about the link 
between those landslides and the conditioning factors along the Central 
Western Andes and also with the seismicity and the past climate 
variations in this region. Other preliminary works have revealed that 
much more large landslides may exist there (Audin and Bechir, 2006; 
Mather et al., 2014; Crosta et al., 2014) but a general view of the dis­
tribution of the landslide activity at the scale of the Central Western 
Andes instabilities is missing. 
The scope of the paper is to establish a landslide inventory as 
exhaustive as possible along the northermost Central Western Andes (ca. 
15◦- 20◦S), our strategy was based on a review of previous works on 
landslides existing in the literature for this region and on an original 
mapping of unrecognized large landslides based mainly on satellite 
images, Google Earth and DEMs analysis. The finalities of this study are: 
(1) to provide an updated database of large landslides existing between 
latitudes ca. 15 and 20◦S. This database will be open and may be 
modifiable; (2) to provide a first-order view of their typology, size, 
abundance and distribution; and (3) to search for statistical patterns 
between landslide distribution and background settings in order to 
better understand their conditioning factors. 
2. Settings of the western flank of the Central Andes 
2.1. Geodynamic and large-scale morphology 
The Andean cordillera is located on an active tectonic margin where 
the subduction of the Nazca plate beneath the South American plate 
occurs since ~50 Ma (Pardo-Casas and Molnar, 1987) with a conver­
gence rate of ~62 mm. yr−1 (Villegas-Lanza et al., 2016). This process 
generates the construction of the Andes and leads to the formation of 
successive volcanic arcs. Their locations varied in time and were 
controlled by the change of the dip of the subduction slab (Isacks, 1988; 
Allmendinger et al., 1997; James and Sacks, 1999; Sobolev and 
Babeyko, 2005; Haschke et al., 2006; Mamani et al., 2008, 2009). This 
dynamic produced long-term crustal thickening controlled by magmatic 
underplating and tectonic shortening. The western flank of the Central 
Andes is classically subdivided into three main areas (Fig. 1) based on 
different geological and morphological settings inherited from the 
long-term geodynamics evolution of the Andes. 
The first area corresponds to the Coastal Cordillera (CC) which is 
mainly characterized by Proterozoic craton (so-called the Arequipa 
massif, Cobbing and Pitcher, 1972) represented by the association of 
gneisses and migmatites which have been later intruded by Paleozoic 
plutons (Cobbing and Pitcher, 1972; Cobbing et al., 1977; Mukasa and 
Henry, 1990). This Coastal Cordillera forms currently a narrow band 
reaching 50-km-wide and moderate relief and elevation up to 1000 m a. 
s.l. along the Pacific coastline. 
The second area corresponding to the Central Depression (CD) ex­
hibits Tertiary sedimentary series, the so-called Moquegua formation, 
unconformably resting above the Proterozoic and Paleozoic bedrock. 
This area corresponds to a flexural depression located in the front of the 
volcanic arc. This basin collected the erosional products of the Andean 
relief under construction. Those detrital sedimentary series can be 
locally more than 1-km thick (Roperch et al., 2006; Thouret et al., 2007; 
Schildgen et al., 2007; Garzione et al., 2008). Their lithologies evolve 
from thin marine sequences at the base toward conglomeratic conti­
nental deposits with interstratified ignimbrites levels at their top. At 
present-day, this area forms a pediment plain, almost flat with mean 
elevations ranging from 1000 to 1500 m a.s.l., and locally affected by 
fluvial incision (Thouret et al., 2007; Schildgen et al., 2007; Garzione 
et al., 2008). 
The third area corresponds to the Western Cordillera (WC) which 
presents a higher relief from 1000 to 5000 m a.s.l. It is made of Mesozoic 
marine sequences and Cenozoic, essentially Paleogene-Neogene, vol­
cano-sedimentary series related to the migration of the successive vol­
canic arcs (Mamani et al., 2010). One of the last main volcanic phases 
corresponds to the so-called Huaylillas arc (24-10 Ma, Quang et al., 
2005; Thouret et al., 2007). It produced thick ignimbrite deposits (up to 
300 m of thickness) at a regional scale. Along the Western Cordillera, the 
F. Delgado et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Journal of South American Earth Sciences 116 (2022) 103824
3
top of the Huaylillas deposits corresponds to a preserved paleosurface 
used as a reference surface at a regional scale. All this domain is affected 
by tectonic shortening associated with the development of large-scale 
anticline geometry, well underline by flexures of the Huaylillas paleo­
surface, and by pluri-kilometric crustal fault systems. 
As previously introduced, among those three sub-areas, the Western 
Cordillera is the region where some of the largest landslides have been 
reported in the literature (Chuquibamba landslide - Margirier et al., 
2015; Thouret et al., 2017; Aricota landslide - Delgado et al., 2020; 
Caquilluco landslide - Zerathe et al., 2017; Lluta landslide - W¨orner 
et al., 2002; Strasser and Schlunegger, 2005; Mi˜nimi˜ni and Latagualla 
landslides - Pinto et al., 2008; El Magnifico landslide - Mather et al., 
2014; Crosta et al., 2017, Fig. 1). We bring here below further detailed 
geological and geomorphological descriptions of this key region 
required to better understand the gravitational destabilization affecting 
the Central Western Andes. 
Fig. 1. (a) Study area location and major climatic features of South America showing the Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ), El Ni˜no wings and the Humboldt 
oceanic current, (b) focus on the study area showing the different geomorphotectonic areas of the Central Western Andes and the location of giant landslides 
documented in the literature (Chuquibamba landslide - Margirier et al., 2015; Thouret et al., 2017; Aricota landslide - Delgado et al., 2020; Caquilluco landslide - 
Zerathe et al., 2017; Lluta landslide - W¨orner et al., 2002; Strasser and Schlunegger, 2005; Mi˜nimi˜ni and Latagualla landslides - Pinto et al., 2008; El Magnifico 
landslide - Mather et al., 2014; Crosta et al., 2017), (c) and (d) AA′ topographic profile of the western flank of the Central Andes and its geological interpretation 
(adapted from Armijo et al., 2015), respectively. CC: Coastal Cordillera, CD: Central Depression, WC: Western Cordillera, AL: Altiplano. 
F. Delgado et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Journal of South American Earth Sciences 116 (2022) 103824
4
2.2. Lithostratigraphy 
The oldest rocks in the studied area correspond to the Precambrian 
crystalline basement. It consists of gneiss, migmatites, pegmatites, 
schists and diorites. This rock assemblage is located between latitudes 
15◦-18◦S, outcropping mainly along the Peruvian Coastal Cordillera 
along an NW-SE orientation (Fig. 2) and was dated between 1861 ± 32 
Ma and 946 Ma by Casquet et al. (2010). 
Paleozoic rocks were emplaced in erosional unconformity, their 
lithostratigraphic units are observed along the Coastal Cordillera (Fig. 2) 
and are represented by the Marcona (Cambrian), Cabanillas (Devonian), 
Ambo and Tarma (Carboniferous) formations. These units are mostly 
made up of limestones, conglomerates, sandstones and shales (Newell, 
1945). 
The Mesozoic record is characterized by important Jurassic and 
Cretaceous marine sedimentation, controlled by the tectonic opening of 
the Arequipa-Tarapac´a sedimentary basin (Vicente, 1981). Those de­
posits outcrop all along the entire western Andean flank and correspond 
to thick series of limestones (mudstone to grainstone) and marls of the 
Pelado and Socosani formations (Wilson and García, 1962; Monge and 
Cervantes, 2000) conformably covered by the Yura Group and the 
Hualhuani Formation (Wilson and García, 1962; Vicente, 1981) 
composed of quartz sandstones and black shales interstratified. The top 
of the Mesozoic series is affected by an erosive discordance, overlain by 
volcanic and volcano-sedimentary rocks of the Toquepala Group (Bel­
lido Bravo and Guevara, 1963; Bellon and Lefevre, 1916). 
The distribution of the Cenozoic lithostratigraphic units is more 
complex and is related to the formation of the volcanic arc of the Andes, 
its successive migration and its importance in the creation of forearc, 
back-arc and intra-arc basins. In the Coastal Depression, deposits of 
sedimentary sequences accumulated, mainly of marine origin, also from 
the erosion coming from the proto-Andean under construction, which 
generated the almost synchronous creation of the Caman´a and Moque­
gua basins in southern Peru and Azapa in northern Chile. These inter­
stratified sequences of conglomerates with volcanic sequences are called 
Moquegua Group (Thouret et al., 2007; Schildgen et al., 2007) in Peru 
while in Chile they correspond to the Azapa Formation (W¨orner et al., 
2000; Pinto et al., 2007). These sequences, which are up to 800 m thick 
(Bellido, 1979), are the result of erosion of the Western Cordillera and 
were deposited from the Oligocene to the late Miocene. From the Eocene 
onwards, constant volcanic events began and continue to the present 
day. The Huaylillas formation (Wilson and García, 1962), constitutes a 
wide surface that extends up to the north of Chile, where it is called 
Huaylillas surface (W¨orner et al., 2000). This formation is a stratigraphic 
superposition of pyroclastic flows (W¨orner et al., 2000; Mamani et al., 
2010) developing a thickness between 500 and 600 m (Wilson and 
García, 1962; Salinas, 1985). This formation is well-preserved due to the 
hyper-arid climatic conditions and its top surface represents a regional 
paleosurface. The only forms of erosion are the incision of the valleys 
produced by the rivers descending from the Altiplano (Evenstar et al., 
2017). The northeast is dominated by a large volume of andesites and 
rhyolites associated with ignimbrites assigned to the Barroso Group 
(Roperch et al., 2006; Mamani et al., 2010; Acosta et al., 2011), related 
to the magmatic activity of the Barroso Arc (Mamani et al., 2012). The 
Quaternary rocks are expressed by Pleistocene lava produced during a 
recent activity of active volcanoes (e.g. Sabancaya, Ampato, Ubinas) 
related to the activity of the magmatic arc (e.g. Mari˜no et al., 2021; 
Rivera et al., 2020). Quaternary deposits cover a large part of the 
basement and can reach a few meters thick. These deposits correspond 
to fluvial and alluvial deposits in the main valley and glacial deposits in 
high elevation areas that evidence recent climatic fluctuations. 
Fig. 2. Lithostratigraphy and main structural features of the Central Western Andes (adapted from http://geocatmin.ingemmet.gob.pe/geocatmin for Peru and 
https://portalgeominbeta.sernageomin.cl/for Chile). 
F. Delgado et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Journal of South American Earth Sciences 116 (2022) 103824
5
2.3. Tectonic setting 
Active or neotectonic faults are mostly present along the Western 
Cordillera 
area 
(http://neotec-opendata.com; 
http://geocatmin. 
ingemmet.gob.pe/geocatmin). The width of the Western Cordillera 
shows important variations being wider in South Peru than along North 
Chile (Fig. 1). This variation is related to the partitioning of the defor­
mation controlled by the Nazca plate convergence toward a curved 
shape boundary (Arica bend) of the South American plate (Allmendinger 
et al., 1997). The Western Cordillera is deformed by intense folding, 
inverse faults and large overflows due to the shortening and thickening 
of the crust mainly associated with an increase in the subducted slab 
angle (Armijo et al., 2015). 
In southern Peru, the tectonic regime is transpressive related to the 
activity of the Incapuquio Fault System (IFS), which extends for more 
than 200 km along an NW-SE direction (Fig. 2). This crustal-scale fault 
system displays sinistral displacement affecting mainly the Moquegua 
Formation and the Toquepala and Yura groups, defining a tectonic 
contact between them (Jacay et al., 2002). The IFS is considered 
potentially active as shown by the paleo-seismological studies that 
revealed Holocene surface ruptures (Benavente et al., 2021). Other 
secondary fault systems are connected to the IFS such as: (i) the Pur­
gatorio fault (PF), located between the Pampa Purgatorio and the village 
of Mirave, striking E-W along 70 km (Benavente et al., 2017b) or (ii) the 
Sama-Calientes fault (SF), striking E-W along ~50 km (Hall et al., 2008). 
Both are mainly reverse faults with a slight dextral component and have 
registered Holocene reactivations and surface failures (Benavente and 
Audin, 2009; Benavente et al., 2017b). 
To the south of the Arica bend (in North of Chile) the tectonic regime 
becomes compressive and correlated with an important increase in the 
plate convergence during the last 30-20 Myr (Pardo-Casas and Molnar, 
1987; Somoza, 1998). The most important structure corresponds to the 
West-Vergent Thrust System (WTS) located in the Western Cordillera 
(Fig. 2) with an N–S trending direction and extending over 450 km in 
northern Chile (García et al., 2004, 2013; Blanco and Tomlinson, 2013; 
Valenzuela et al., 2014; Morand´e et al., 2015; Tomlinson et al., 2015). 
This main regional tectonic structure presents W-dipping high angle 
segments associated with the development of large folds with mono­
clinal geometry described as regional flexures. These structures present 
slight variations in the magnitude of displacement along the course 
Fig. 3. Settings of the western flank of the Central Andes. (a) fault and seismicity (faults database: http://neotec-opendata.com and http://geocatmin.ingemmet.gob. 
pe/geocatmin; instrumental earthquakes from http://ds.iris.edu/seismon/index.phtml and historical earthquakes from Villegas-Lanza et al., 2016). (b) and (c) 
topography and slope, respectively (both derived from SRTM DEM of 30 m of resolution), (d) mean annual rainfall (TRMM 3B43 annual rainfall of the Andes 
averaged for the period of 1998–2019). The white dashed line marks the eastern limit of our study area. 
F. Delgado et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Journal of South American Earth Sciences 116 (2022) 103824
6
(Pinto et al., 2004; Farías et al., 2005) and affect rocks of the Moquegua 
Group and the Huaylillas formation (ignimbrites). 
2.4. Seismicity 
The western flank of the Central Andes is affected by two types of 
seismic activity (Fig. 3a). The first one is related to the subduction dy­
namics that produce earthquakes with magnitudes that could be higher 
than 8, with slab ruptures of several hundreds of kilometers along the 
subduction zone (Villegas-Lanza et al., 2016). Recent strong subduction 
earthquakes include the 2007 Pisco earthquake (Mw 8.0, depth 18 km, 
~100 km north to the study area), the 2001 Arequipa earthquake 
(Mw8.4; depth 30 km) and the 2014 Iquique earthquake (Mw8.1, depth 
20 km) (Fig. 3d). Those earthquakes were also associated with swarms of 
seismicity and aftershocks of moderate to high magnitudes (Fig. 3a). 
Several historical mega earthquakes are also documented in this area 
(see Fig. 3a). A recurrence time between 100 and 300 years is proposed 
for those events for the same slab portion (Kelleher, 1972; Dorbath et al., 
1990; Chlieh et al., 2011). 
The second one is related to the crustal faults network. The Coastal 
Cordillera, Central Depression and the Western Cordillera are affected 
by several major faults (Figs. 2 and 3a) that experienced recent seismo- 
tectonic activity (Lavenu et al., 2000; Jacay et al., 2002; Audin et al., 
2003, 2006; Barrientos et al., 2004; Lavenu, 2005; PMA, 2009; Leyton 
et al., 2010; Benavente et al., 2017a, 2017b). The seismic record in the 
study area is mainly focused on the subduction dynamics because it 
produces the strongest earthquakes. In contrast, the western cordillera 
does not benefit from a seismic network allowing the location of 
earthquakes at crustal-scale depth in relation to the major faults distri­
bution (Figs. 2 and 3d). However, some seismic records over the last 50 
years apart from the region of Maca (upper Colca) (Fig. 3a) have been 
reported that indicate moderate seismicity up to Mw5. Paleoseismo­
logical studies show that some of these faults have produced recurrent 
shallow seismicity during the Holocene. The analyses of the offsets along 
the rupture surfaces are consistent with earthquake magnitudes up to 
Mw7.5 (e.g. Benavente et al., 2017a; Santib´a˜nez et al., 2019). These are 
some examples: the Incapuquio fault (Audin et al., 2008; Benavente 
et al., 2021), the Purgatorio fault (Benavente et al., 2017b), the 
Sama-Calientes fault (Audin et al., 2006) and the Bajo Molle fault 
(Gonz´alez et al., 2015). The length of fault failure is smaller compared to 
subduction earthquakes, but the energy and the ground acceleration 
generated by the shallow ruptures along those faults can be very strong 
(Benavente et al., 2017a). The recurrence period for this type of crustal 
seismicity is commonly assumed to be about thousand years (Leyton 
et al., 2010; Benavente et al., 2017b). 
2.5. Topography 
As shown by Fig. 3b and c, the western flank of the Central Andes is 
characterized by two main types of topography. First, a large wave- 
length topography that is directly related to the orogen formation and 
its evolution. This topography, with elevation ranges between 1500 and 
4500 m a.s.l. forms the Western Andean flank itself, striking NW-SE in 
Peru and NNW-SSE in Chile, roughly parallel to the subduction trench 
(Fig. 3b). Steep slopes (20–30◦) are found at the southern extremity of 
the Western Cordillera, along the main reverse faults and anticlinal- 
flexure growth (Fig. 3a). This large-scale wave-length topography is 
also revealed by a major paleosurface developed above the Huaylillas 
ignimbrite. This major geomorphological feature exists all along the 
western flank of the Central Andes (Fig. 2), characterized by a regular 
primitive drainage network forming a large striped surface. Its mean 
slope varies between 5◦and 20◦(mainly toward the South) depending 
on the local amplitude of the structural flexure and fault-propagation 
folds (Wilson and García, 1962). Second, a more local but stronger 
topography corresponds to the deep canyons that dissect the Western 
Cordillera. They are up to several kilometers deep in some places in 
southern Peru (Cotahuasi, Majes, Tambo, see Fig. 3b and c), generating 
strong local relief and very steep slopes (>30◦) along their flanks 
(Fig. 3c). The formation of those canyons started during the late Miocene 
and is related to the regional uplift and the specific climate of this region 
(Thouret et al., 2007; Schildgen et al., 2009, 2010; Gunnell et al., 2010). 
2.6. Current and past climate 
The Central Western Andes of southern Peru and northern Chile are 
part of the Atacama Desert, known as one of the driest places worldwide. 
Several factors are often proposed to explain this extreme lack of pre­
cipitation: (1) the mid-latitude of the region (~20◦S) located along the 
sinking branch of the Hadley Circulation generating high pressure of dry 
air; (2) the oceanic Humboldt Current, characterized by upwelling of 
cold water along the South American Pacific coast, which cools the air 
near the surface and prevent moisture evaporation from the Pacific 
ocean (La Ni˜na-like conditions); (3) the rain shadow effect of the Andes 
limiting the transfer of moisture coming from the Atlantic and the 
Amazonia (Houston and Hartley, 2003). 
The main source of moisture is coming from the northeast, from the 
Atlantic Ocean and the Amazonian basin as depicted by a north-south 
rainfall gradient (Fig. 3d). Precipitations can reach ~1000 mm/yr in 
the northeastern boundary of our study area (at latitude ~15◦S) and 
along the western boundary of the Central Altiplano (Fig. 3d). Those 
precipitations are seasonal, occurring mostly during the austral summer, 
associated with the South American monsoon regime and the seasonal 
southward shift of the Intertropical convergence zone above the Alti­
plano. Despite a little of this moisture can reach the upper part of the 
Pacific watersheds, the Western Cordillera, as part of the Atacama 
Desert, remains arid receiving less than 200 mm/yr of rain, while the 
coast and coastal depression receive less than 50 mm/yr of rain (New 
et al., 2002; Strecker et al., 2007). The hyper-aridity of the Atacama 
Desert, and such climatic setting, are thought to prevail since at least 10 
Ma (Rech et al., 2019 and references therein), responsible for very low 
denudation rates over the long term (erosion<0.5 m/Ma; e.g. Hall et al., 
2008; Placzek et al., 2013) and long-term preservation of landscapes. On 
the other hand, as the upper of the watersheds received precipitations 
from Amazonian moisture, the main rivers have strong erosional ca­
pacity which produced deep canyon incisions (Cotahuasi, Majes, Tambo; 
Fig. 3b and c) through the arid Western Cordillera. 
The current meteorological conditions can be episodically modu­
lated by El Ni˜no Southern Oscillation (ENSO) which results in a warming 
of the Pacific Ocean surface related to the Trade winds carrying warm 
water from the eastern equatorial Pacific towards the South American 
coast. This can lead to very strong storms such as in March 2015, when 
up to 40 mm of 1-day accumulated precipitation fed the Atacama region 
(Bozkurt et al., 2016), triggering strong flash floods and debris flows 
(Aguilar et al., 2020). Despite paleoclimate records covering the Late 
Quaternary in the Atacama region being rare and often discontinuous (e. 
g. Bartz et al., 2020), some evidences of past humid phases has been also 
reported. They included widespread pluvial stages termed the Central 
Andean Pluvial Event (CAPE, e.g. Quade et al., 2008; Gayo et al., 2012) 
recorded as lake extensions and glacier advances in the Central Atacama 
of Northern Chile. Records of flash floods and debris flows linked to 
paleo-El Ni˜no events have been reported during the late Pleistocene in 
Southern Peru (e.g. Keefer et al., 2003). Then evidences of more 
persistent humid conditions related to ENSO-like climate configuration 
during the last interglacial periods are recorded as paleolakes extensions 
(e.g. Ritter et al., 2018; Placzek et al., 2013) and fluvial terraces 
aggradation in the valleys (Steffen et al., 2010; Litty et al., 2016). Those 
humid events are thought to have persisted over millennial to pluri­
millenial periods (i.e. the Ouki Event (100–120 ka), Placzek et al., 2013; 
Ritter et al., 2019). 
F. Delgado et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Journal of South American Earth Sciences 116 (2022) 103824
7
3. Methods 
3.1. Landslide mapping strategy 
Our main objective was to establish an inventory as exhaustive as 
possible of large landslides (areas >0.1 km2) along the Central Western 
Andes in a region bounded to the north and south by the exact latitudes 
14.8 and 20.5◦S, and to the west and east by the Pacific coast and the 
western limit of the Altiplano, respectively (Fig. 1b). As detailed here 
below, our landslide inventory was based on: (1) a review of previous 
works and mapping of landslides existing in the literature for this region 
and (2) a manual mapping of newly recognized large landslides based on 
specific geomorphologic criteria combing GIS analysis (using Google 
Earth and DEMs (30 m TanDEM-X and 2 m Pleiades). This mapping 
using remote tools was made possible by the collective expertise of our 
team acquired during several past field works dedicated to landslide- 
geomorphology-tectonic in this region for a dozen years. About 10% 
of the landslides inventoried in this study were visited in the field, 
several of those being mapped in detail as already published in previous 
works involving our team (e.g. Zavala et al., 2013; Margirier et al., 2015; 
Zerathe et al., 2016, 2017; Delgado et al., 2020). 
Indeed, the reviews of previous studies included individual landslide 
case studies (e.g. Strasser and Schlunegger, 2005; Pinto et al., 2008; 
Hermanns et al., 2012; Zavala et al., 2013; Margirier et al., 2015; Zer­
athe et al., 2016, 2017; Bontemps et al., 2018; Lacroix et al., 2015, 2019, 
2020; Thouret et al., 2017; Delgado et al., 2020; Gaidzik et al., 2020; 
S´anchez-Nú˜nez et al., 2020). We also revised a few studies including 
some local landslide databases such as (Audin and Bechir, 2006 and 
Crosta et al., 2014 for South Peru and Mather et al., 2014 and Crosta 
et al., 2014 for North Chile). Following this review, we note that two 
main types of landslide dominate in this region (Fig. 4): (i) coherent 
landslides for which the slipped mass moved in only one or few packets, 
typically corresponding to rockslide typology, and (ii) disrupted land­
slides which evolve as a granular flow of rock and boulders, typically 
corresponding to rock avalanche typology. In order to decipher if those 
two landslide types may have different controlling factors, we kept this 
binary classification for our mapping. 
Fig. 4 illustrates the specific geomorphologic criteria that we used for 
mapping and classification for both cases. Importantly, a landslide 
phenomenon was ascribed to a site only if the formal identification of a 
headscarp associated to a slipped mass was possible. To the contrary, 
morphologies such as large erosional amphitheaters or slope-break were 
not mapped as a landslide if a slipped mass was not clearly identified at 
the scarp base. Finally, we attempted to define a qualitative state of 
activity for our mapped landslides, trying to distinguish between two 
main types (Fig. 4). First the recent or active landslides, that are known 
to affect human infrastructures (agricultural land, road, village, etc.), 
showing fresh morphologies (fresh scarp, recent river dam, etc.) and/or 
which are monitored and referred in published papers. Additionally, we 
attempted to revise each mapped landslide on the Google Earth time- 
lapse tools, to visually check if some surface large-scale displacements 
(>100 m) might occur in the last 37-years. The oldest images (from 1985 
to ~2005) being of rather poor quality, only displacements of >100 m 
might have been detectable. Second, the ancient or paleo landslides, 
being typically characterized by smooth and weathered surface mor­
phologies, partially covered by eolian sand, laharic flows or which have 
been significantly re-eroded or re-incised by rivers (see also Hermanns 
et al., 2012). 
In order to carry out the recognition and mapping of landslides as 
much as possible in an orderly and reproducible way, we gridded our 
study area (cells of 0.5 × 1◦) and we explored and mapped analyzing cell 
by cell. The grid used is provided in the supplementary data. For each 
identified landslide, a polygon including the headscarp and the slipped 
mass was drawn (Fig. 5). 
3.2. Dimensional and geological landslide parameters 
Understanding the occurrence of landslides requires a thorough 
knowledge of their initial failure conditions. It thus requires data on the 
terrain morphology (elevation, slope, local relief) on which landslides 
has developed, on the lithology and on the morphometric characteristics 
of the landslide itself. For each mapped landslide, we complied this data 
in a database described in detail below (Supplement, Table 1). This 
database was further used for statistical analysis of landslides patterns. 
All calculations were made using ArcGIS software and using the SRTM 
DEM of 30 m of resolution (SRTM, DOI:/10.5066/F7K072R7). The 
Fig. 4. Morphological criteria used for landslide recognition and mapping along the Central Western Andes. We classified the landslides according to two main 
typologies (rockslide and rock avalanche) and also attempted to ascribe a qualitative state of activity (paleo or recent) to each identified case (see text for details). 
Illustrated examples are from (a) the Aricota paleo rockslide (Delgado et al., 2020) (b) the Caquilluco paleo rock avalanche (Zerathe et al., 2017), (c) the Siguas active 
landslide (Lacroix et al., 2019) and (d) an active landslide from this study (landslide n◦109. RRIM: Red Relief Image Map). 
F. Delgado et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Journal of South American Earth Sciences 116 (2022) 103824
8
Spatial Analyst tool of ArcGIS toolbox was used to compute slope and 
local relief map, both calculated considering cells of 2 × 2 km. 
For each landslide, we extracted the area (km2) of the polygon. Then, 
two points were set: one located at the center of the headscarp and 
another one located at the landslide toe, in order to indicate the origin of 
the landslide and its lower limit, respectively (Fig. 5). At the location of 
the headscarp point, as recommended by Yilmaz and Ercanoglu (2019), 
we extracted the lithology in which the landslide developed following 
the lithostratigraphic layers defined in Fig. 2. We also extracted at this 
location the characteristic of the topography: the elevation (m a.s.l.), the 
slope (◦) and the local relief (m). Finally, using the headscarp point and 
the toe point, we calculated the landslide length (L in km) and the 
landslide height (ΔH in km). 
All of these morphometric parameters are necessary to perform basic 
statistical analyses (histograms) of landslide properties in order to better 
understand their controlling factors. This involves exploring relation­
ships that exist between landslides, topography and lithology through 
analyzing the frequency distribution of landslides as a function of their 
area, elevation above sea level, slope and lithology. Through analyzing 
the relationships ΔH vs L and L vs A, according to the different landslide 
type, we also explored the mobility of landslide masses and their 
dimensional properties. 
3.3. Landslide spatial density analysis 
The activity of landslides is conditioned by different factors among 
which are for instance the local relief, the slope, the geology of the site 
(lithology, faults, structures, etc.). In some areas, the interplay of those 
factors may generate higher landslide susceptibility and thus landslide 
clustering. In order to identify if the landslide location responds to a 
clustering in the western flank of the Central Andes, we applied the 
Ripley’s K Function (Ripley, 1977). This function allows determining 
statistically if the phenomenon appears to be spatially dispersed, clus­
tered, or randomly distributed throughout the study area. It has been 
often used to explore the spatial pattern of landslides in previous studies 
(Tonini et al., 2014; G¨orum, 2019; P´anek et al., 2019). 
Computations were done with the R software (R Core Team, 2019), 
using the package ‘spatstat’ (Baddeley et al., 2020). As recommended by 
Tonini et al. (2014), we applied the “Kinhom” function (Baddeley and 
Turner, 2005), which is a modification of the original Ripley’s 
K-function for inhomogeneous point distribution. This variant “Kinhom 
(r)” allows taking into account the non-stationarity of the studied pro­
cess due to spatial variability of the geological and topographical 
characteristics over the studied area (Tonini et al., 2014). The Kinhom(r) 
function can be defined as (Marcon et Puech, 2009): 
̂K in hom(r) = 1
A
∑N
i=1
∑N
j=1,i∕=j
c(i, j, r)
λ(i)λ(j)
(1)  
where r is the radius in m, A is the studied area in m2, the indicator C (i,j, 
r) is the average number of neighbors, being equal to 1 if the distance 
between points i and j equals at most r, or equals 0 otherwise, and λ(i) 
λ(j) are the process density at points i and j, respectively. Theoretically, 
when Kinhom(r) = πr2, the analyzed points are distributed indepen­
dently (or randomly) from each other. When Kinhom(r) > πr2, the 
probability to find a neighboring point at the distance r is greater than 
the probability to find a point in the same area at any other place, i.e. the 
points are aggregated. When Kinhom(r) < πr2, the points are dispersed. 
Final results were plotted as the Linhom function (Besag and Diggle, 
1977), which is a normalization of the Kinhom(r) function to get a 
benchmark at zero and to facilitate visualization:  
L(r) =
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
K(r)
π
√
−r
(2) 
We used the centroid of the landslide headscarps (Fig. 5) as point 
input for the Kinhom analysis as recommended by Yilmaz and Ercanoglu 
(2019) and references therein. In the case of large destabilized areas 
(>0.1 km2), with debris that can have long run-out, the landslide 
headscarp centroids can provide a better assessment of the geological 
and topographical conditions of the landslide initiation than any other 
point located along the debris path or at the landslide toe for instance 
(Yilmaz and Ercanoglu, 2019). Finally, we used the range of radius 
obtained from this analysis, to calculate a kernel density of landslides 
over the studied area and to image the point of the higher frequency 
distribution of landslides. 
3.4. Frequency-area relationships 
We first explore the distribution of the mapped landslides according 
to their area using non-cumulated histograms. Then we compute fre­
quency–area distributions (FAD), which is commonly used to explore 
the statistical properties of landslide inventories, to compare it with sub- 
datasets of the same region or with other inventories previously pub­
lished (e.g. Valagussa et al., 2019). Frequency-area distributions are 
plotted considering landslide-area bins versus their corresponding 
non-cumulative frequency-density values. It has been defined by Mala­
mud et al. (2004) as: 
f(AL) = δNL/δAL
(3)  
where δNL is the number of landslides with areas between AL and AL +
δAL, AL being the area of landslide and δAL is the width of a given 
landslide area class (bin). The obtained distributions are often plotted in 
a doubly logarithmic plot (Tebbens, 2020 and references therein. Clas­
sically applied to landslides inventoried after strong earthquakes or 
storms, this analysis revealed that the frequency of landslide-sizes dis­
plays a nonlinear pattern through landslide scales (see recent review in 
Tanyas¸ et al., 2019). For large to medium landslide ranges, the fre­
quency strongly increases with the decreasing landslide areas, 
mimicking a negative power-law and suggesting fractal scaling. Then at 
a certain range of medium landslide area, the frequency area distribu­
tion generally shows an inflexion and the power-law no longer applies. 
Finally, a rollover is sometimes observed for the smallest landslide 
ranges for which the frequency decreases (Tanyas¸ et al., 2019). 
Two main strategies and derivative interpretations of those distri­
butions exist. Malamud et al. (2004) considered the inflexion and the 
rollover to represent the natural landslide distribution and proposed a fit 
Fig. 5. Landslide sketch illustrating data collection procedure. (a) plan view 
and b cross-section. The green polygon delimits the whole landslide area 
(headscarp and slided mass). The yellow dot locates the centroid of the head­
scarp, considered as the origin of the landslide where several data are extracted 
(see text for details). 
F. Delgado et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Journal of South American Earth Sciences 116 (2022) 103824
9
of the complete distribution with a three-parameter inverse gamma 
distribution. A second strategy (e.g. P´anek et al., 2019; G¨orum, 2019) is 
to fit solely the tail of the distribution for medium to large landslides 
using a power-law above a certain cut-off value of landslide size. For 
landslide sizes smaller than this cut-off, the inventory is considered as 
incomplete. Here we applied the second strategy because we chose to 
map landslides starting from areas of 0.1 km2 that biases the distribution 
for small landslide ranges. Moreover, as our inventory stack a large 
period of time, it is very probable that some of the smallest landslides 
were eroded. 
First, we applied the method of Clauset et al. (2009) focusing on 
landslide areas only (non-binned). Using the maximum likelihood esti­
mate, it provides the best fit of a power-law, and its exponent labelled 
alpha, for the landslide-areas higher than a certain cut-off value. To 
obtain the power-law fit of a frequency-area distribution, the exponent 
value is converted using the relation beta = alpha +1 (Guzzetti et al., 
2002; Clauset et al., 2009). We computed the FAD using equation (3) 
and applied log-spaced bins that respect two conditions: (1) a low 
number of bins according to the scale-range of the database and (2) to 
avoid empty bins. 
The power-law exponent generally varies between 1.5 and 3.5 
(Tanyas¸ et al., 2019). It reveals how much large landslides contribute to 
the inventory. A lower value of β value means a more important 
contribution of large landslides to the total inventory (Van Den Eeckhaut 
et al., 2007). 
4. Results 
4.1. Landslide inventory, typology and morphology 
The landslide inventory obtained in this study is presented in Fig. 6 
according to the two typologies and state of activity previously defined. 
The complete landslide database, including all landslide properties and 
a kmz file of the landslide polygons, are provided in supplementary data. 
In total, we have identified and mapped more than a thousand landslides 
distributed between ca. 15 and 20◦S along the Western Central Andes, 
covering a total area of 3782 km2 (Table 1). 
Our results show that gravitational destabilizations along the West­
ern Central Andes are dominated by rockslide typology, representing 
~86% of the identified landslides while the rest corresponds to rock 
avalanche type (Fig. 6a). Importantly, we also show that a great majority 
of landslides (more than 90%) are paleo landslides. The few active 
landslides that we identified are located in specific regions such as the 
upper Colca valley or the Sihuas region (Fig. 6b). 
The landslides distribution over the three main geomorphotectonic 
units of the western Andean flank is summarized in Table 1. The highest 
percentage of landslides is found along the Western Cordillera and the 
Central Depression, each holding 76% and 21% of all the mapped 
landslides, respectively. Regarding the typologies, the Central Depres­
sion is strictly dominated by rockslide type (~99%), while the relative 
amount of rockslide/rock avalanche type is about 20%/80% for both the 
Coastal Cordillera and the Western Cordillera. We found that the 
Western Cordillera and the Central Depression present both about 2% of 
destabilized areas while the Coastal Cordillera have only 0.3% of its 
areas affected by large landslides. 
4.2. Landslide spatial distributions 
Results of the Ripley’s K Function applied to our landslide database 
are plotted on Fig. 7 as the Linhom(r) trend for the whole landslide 
database (n = 1006), the rockslides (n = 866) and the rock avalanches 
(n = 140) group. Compared to the theoretical Linhom(r) trend for 
random data, those results indicate that the landslides are not randomly 
Fig. 6. Landslides inventory along the Western Central Andes between ca. 15 and 20◦S. A) Distribution of landslides by typology: rockslide and rock avalanche. B) 
Landslides distribution according to their state of activity: recent (or active) and paleo. CC: Coastal Cordillera, CD: Central Depression, WC: Western Cordillera. The 
black grid corresponds to cells of 50 × 100 km that were explored one by one for the landslide mapping (see text for details). 
Fig. 7. Results of the Ripley’s L-function for our landslide inventory. Grey bar 
is the range of maximum distribution frequency and is similar for the whole 
dataset and the two different typologies. 
F. Delgado et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Journal of South American Earth Sciences 116 (2022) 103824
10
distributed along the western Andean flank, but instead that they display 
some spatial clustering, with cluster radius up to ca. 100 km. The shape 
Linhom(r) curves are roughly the same for both the whole dataset and 
for each individual typology, indicating a similar spatial pattern. The 
maximum distribution frequency for the different datasets is reached 
between 10 and 30 km (Fig. 7). This range of radius corresponds to the 
mean radius of the aggregates of events where the highest number of 
landslides is found (Goreaud, 2000). 
Kernel density maps of landslides were produced using a mean and 
conservative radius of 20 km (Fig. 8). As expected from the Ripley’s K 
Function analysis, the spatial distribution of large landslides is not ho­
mogeneous along the Western Andean flank. Considering the whole 
landslide database (Fig. 8a), several clusters are revealed, the most 
significant ones being along the Western Cordillera zone. In particular, 
we note an important landslide cluster in North Chile at ca. 20◦S – 
69.5◦W between Iquique and Arica latitudes. Three other clusters are 
located in southernmost Peru, 50 km northeast from Ilo at ca. 17.5◦S – 
70.5◦W, and are aligned along a strike NW-SE. Another cluster is iden­
tified 100 km north from Arequipa at ca. 16◦S – 71.5◦W. This zone 
corresponds to the upper Colca Valley where numerous landslides have 
been already reported and studied (e.g. Lacroix et al., 2015). Finally, 
two smaller clusters are detected at ca.15◦S – 74◦W and 15◦S - 74.5◦W, 
50 km east from Nazca (Fig. 8a). 
The kernel density distribution of rockslide (Fig. 8b) is similar to the 
one obtained for the whole database (Fig. 8a) consistently with the fact 
that rockslide is the dominant typology in this inventory. All the clusters 
previously listed also exist in the rockslide kernel density map (Fig. 8b). 
Then, kernel density of rock avalanche also displays also a clustering 
mainly located along the Western Cordillera (Fig. 8c). The main clusters 
of rock avalanches coincide with some of the general clusters at ca. 20◦S 
– 69.5◦W, ca. 17.5◦S – 70.5◦W, and ca.15◦S – 74◦W (Fig. 8c). On the 
other hand, several other clusters identified for the rockslide type do not 
appear on the kernel density map of rock avalanches. This suggests some 
specificities of the factors controlling the rock avalanche processes, that 
may be different from those controlling rockslide occurrences. 
4.3. Landslide size distribution 
According to the minimal landslide area considered for this in­
ventory (>0.1 km2) all the mapped landslides fall in the category “large 
landslide”. The histogram of landslide areas (Fig. 9) shows a strong 
asymmetrical distribution with a decrease of the number of landslides 
function to the destabilized surface areas. About 93% of the landslides 
show areas between 0.1 and 10 km2 (Fig. 9a). In detail (Fig. 9b), in this 
range, we still observe this asymmetric trend, the landslide sizes being 
more represented are the range 0.1–2 km2, cumulating 67% of land­
slides. Fig. 9a evidences the absence of landslides for areas ranging be­
tween 80 and 170 km2. Beyond 170 km2, three giant landslides are 
recorded (i.e. Chuquibamba, Caquilluco and Lluta). Looking at the cu­
mulative areas, the landslides of the range above 10 km2 represent more 
than 50% of the total landslide area although being less represented 
(<7%). The 3 largest landslides are contributing alone to 10% of the 
total cumulative area. In Fig. 9c, it can be observed that the clusters 
along the Western Cordillera are dominated by landslides with indi­
vidual areas smaller than 10 km2 and located in the headwaters of the 
main basins and sub-basins. Interestingly, the three largest giant land­
slides previously mentioned do not belong to the previously described 
clusters (Fig. 8). Instead, they locate in areas with relatively low to 
moderate density of landslides. This might suggest that the factors 
controlling very large landslides are different from those triggering 
smaller features. 
The obtained p-values of the frequency area density distribution of 
landslides are about ~0.5 (Fig. 10), indicating a good consistency be­
tween a power-law model and the tail of our distributions (Clauset et al., 
2009). For the whole landslide dataset (ALL), a power-law can be fitted 
over 2 to 3 orders of magnitude of landslide areas, displaying an 
exponent (beta) of 2.31 ± 0.16 and a cut-off value of 4.0 ± 1.9 × 106 m2. 
Considering their respective uncertainties, the best-fit parameters of the 
rockslide and rock avalanche sub datasets remain both almost undif­
ferentiable with those of the whole dataset. We note that the rock 
Fig. 8. Spatial distribution analysis of landslides along the western flank of the 
Central Andes computed thought kernel density analysis using a searching 
radius 20 km for (a) the whole inventory, (b) the rockslide type and (c) the rock 
avalanche type. 
F. Delgado et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Journal of South American Earth Sciences 116 (2022) 103824
11
avalanche group provides a slight lower power-law exponent (2.09 ±
0.22) which may reflect a dominance of larger landslide features in this 
typology. 
4.4. Landslide morphometry 
The analysis of morphometric parameters (ΔH, L and A) associated 
with the two landslide typologies (rockslide and rock avalanche) pro­
vide first order view of the respective landslide dimensions and it 
highlights some trends (Fig. 11). A correlation (r = ~0.7) is obtained 
between landslide height (ΔH) versus landslide run-out (L), for both 
rockslides and rock avalanches, indicating that higher is the landslide 
height, longer is the run-out of debris (Fig. 11a). The behavior is similar 
for both typologies as most of the points overlap. The maximum run-out 
~41.3 km is obtained for a rock avalanche showing a height of ~3.3 km. 
However, medians reveal the greater size of rock avalanches, which are 
about two times higher in length and height than the rockslides 
(Fig. 11a). A good correlation (r = ~0.9) is also obtained between the 
landslide run-out (L) and landslide area (A) showing that larger areas are 
mainly explained by greater landslide lengths (Fig. 11b). Rock ava­
lanches have median areas that are slightly lower than rockslides. Rock 
avalanches distribution indicates that for the same area than rockslide, 
rock avalanche debris can reach greater run-out, which is consistent 
with the highest mobility of granular flows. 
5. Interpretation and discussion 
5.1. Study limitations 
The main limitations of this landslide inventory are the following. 1) 
Due to the large extension of the study area, it is likely that despite our 
effort some landslides have been missed during the mapping. We 
attached a database in. xml format and a file in. kmz format that will 
serve for future researchers and Peruvian and or Chilean institutions 
who eventually wish to complete and expand this database. 2) Due to the 
variability of resolution of the Google Earth images, and sometimes the 
difficulty leading to the identification of landslide boundaries, we 
consider that an uncertainty of ca. 100 m applies for the boundary of 
landslide polygons. This also applies to all the results derived from 
landslide polygons (landslide area, height, length). 3) In this study, we 
classified the landslides inventoried into two main categories, rockslide 
Fig. 9. (a) Spatial distribution of landslides according to their size. Histograms showing the frequency of landslide areas and corresponding cumulative areas in 
percentage, (b) for the whole dataset using a 10 km2 bin width and (c) for the sub-range 0.1–10 km2 using a bin of 1 km2. CC: Coastal Cordillera, CD: Central 
Depression, WC: Western Cordillera. 
Fig. 10. Frequency area density distributions of landslides in the Central 
Western Andes given for the whole dataset (ALL) and the sub datasets rockslide 
(RS) and rock avalanche (RA). The best parameters and associated uncertainties 
for the power-law fit of the distribution tails are given from the method of 
Clauset et al. (2009). 
F. Delgado et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Journal of South American Earth Sciences 116 (2022) 103824
12
and rock avalanche, as identified by the literature in this region. More 
details about each landslide feature could be added during future 
studies, such as to distinguish between planar or rotational failure 
modes of rockslides to identify their dominant processes. 4) The state of 
activity of landslides was tentatively defined here according to 
morphological indices and criteria to differentiate between currently 
active (or recent) landslides and ancient (or paleo) events. However, the 
absolute ages of the great majority of the ancient landslides remain 
unknown and this should be completed with dating methods in future 
studies. Tracking quantitatively the activity of ongoing landslide failures 
also would be also very interesting but it requires a dedicated research 
applying remote sensing methods (e.g. InSAR), applied at a large-scale, 
which is far beyond the scope of the present study aiming primarily at 
establishing for the first time a comprehensive inventory of large land­
slides in the Central Western Andes. 
5.2. Landslide controlling factors 
In this section we discuss the primary factors that may control or 
influence landslide susceptibility along the western flank of the Central 
Andes. We perform comparisons between the landslide frequency dis­
tribution and the main settings of this area including the stratigraphy, 
the relief, the seismotectonic activity and the precipitation patterns. 
5.2.1. Landslides versus lithostratigraphy 
The type of material (e.g. rock, mud, soil, etc.) is recognized for 
several decades as one of the first parameters controlling landslide type 
and their spatial distribution (Varnes, 1978). Several authors further 
explored the relations between landslides susceptibility and lithology 
(Hansen, 1984; Guzzetti et al., 1996, 1999; Henriques et al., 2015; 
Kumar et al., 2019; Kumar and Gupta, 2021) showing that landslides 
may vary in typology, dimension and movement rate according to the 
geomechanical, structural and hydrogeological properties of the mate­
rial involved (Pradhan and Lee, 2010; Guzzetti et al., 1996). Identifying 
a specific lithostratigraphic layer prone to landslides can be also useful 
in terms of hazard management. 
Crossing the landslide database with the unified lithostratigraphic 
map, we explored the relationships between landslides and lithology 
along the Central Western Andes. In the first order, the results show 
consistency between the dominant lithologies of the study area and their 
respective high proportion of landslides (Fig. 12 and Table 2). It con­
cerns mainly: the Quaternary rocks, covering ~27% of the total area and 
cumulating ~10% of the landslides; the Paleogene-Neogene layers, 
Fig. 11. Morphometric parameters of the landslides for each typology. Rela­
tionship between (a) landslide height (ΔH) versus landslide length (L) and (b) 
landslide length (L) versus landslide area (A). r is the coefficient of correlation 
of Pearson. 
Fig. 12. a) Landslides frequency (in percent) for each lithological unit 
considering: (a) the whole landslide inventory; (b) the rockslide type and (c) the 
rock avalanche type. QD: Quaternary deposits (colluvial, fluvial, glacial, 
eolian); QV: Quaternary volcanic (andesitic lava, volcanic deposits); V–C: 
Volcanic rock (lava, toba, ignimbrite); SC-C: Sedimentary conglomerate; VS-C: 
Volcano-Sedimentary (ignimbrite, toba) I–C: Intrusive rocks (granite); V–M: 
Volcanic rocks (andesite, rhyolite); SM-M: Sediment Marine (limestone and 
shells); I–M: Intrusive (granite); SM-P: Sedimentary marine; I–P: Intrusive 
(granite); MR-PP: Metamorphic rocks. 
F. Delgado et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Journal of South American Earth Sciences 116 (2022) 103824
13
covering ~54% of the total area and cumulating ~78% of the landslides; 
the Mesozoic rocks, covering ~16% of the total area, are cumulating 
~11% of the landslides. For the Paleogene-Neogene layers (Table 2), 
that are dominant in the region, we found that ~23% of landslides are 
located in volcanic rocks (V–C) corresponding to undifferentiated lava; 
~20% of landslides located in the Sedimentary conglomerate (SC–C) 
corresponding to the Moquegua Formation (Fig. 12); ~32% of landslides 
originated in the volcanic sedimentary rocks (VS–C) corresponding to 
ignimbrites layers. These results logically indicate that the common 
occurrence of the different lithology in the study area is roughly 
representative of the landslide distribution. Nevertheless, a higher 
general susceptibility for Paleogene-Neogene volcano-sedimentary 
rocks (VS–C; Huaylillas formation) is shown (Fig. 12a). Those ignim­
brites cumulate >30% of the inventoried landslides whereas they only 
represent ~12% of the study area. 
Then some particularities emerge when looking at the landslide type 
distribution in detail. While the rockslides follow the same pattern as 
previously described (Fig. 12b), we observe that the rock avalanches are 
more frequent in the volcanic series (Fig. 12c). The lava, toba and 
ignimbrite sequences of the Quaternary (QV), Paleogene-Neogene (V–C 
and VS-C) and Mesozoic (V-M) cumulate more >75% of the rock ava­
lanches (Table 2). This finding can be useful for future studies dedicated 
to rock avalanche hazard management and call for geotechnical works 
to better understand why those volcanic sequences are much more prone 
to rock avalanches. Several previous studies reported, through field 
observations and data, the strong anisotropy of rock strength of the 
Paleogene-Neogene volcanic sequences (e.g. García et al., 2004; Strasser 
and Schlunegger, 2005; Pinto et al., 2008; Irwin et al., 2014) that can be 
a conditioning factor for landsliding. Indeed, those volcanic sequences 
are made of weak layers (e.g. unwelded pumice, toba, tuff, volcanic ash, 
epiclastic layers) alternating with much stronger ones (e.g. lava, pyro­
clastic flow deposits, ignimbrite) that can have a compressive strength 
that can be multiple times higher (Irwin et al., 2014). This anisotropy 
affects also the hydrogeological properties of the material, the weaker 
layers being much more permeable than the stronger layers (Strasser 
and Schlunegger, 2005). Three main hypotheses, possibly acting at the 
Table 1 
Main statistics of the landslide inventory.  
Geomorphotectonic 
areas 
Surface of 
Geomorphotectonic 
area (km2) 
Number of 
landslides 
% of 
landslides 
Type of landslides 
(Number of 
landslides =
Percentage) 
Type of landslides (State of 
activity = Number of landslides 
= Percentage) 
Total 
landslide 
area (km2) 
Percentage 
covered by 
landslides (% of 
total area) 
Rockslide 
(RS) 
Rock 
avalanche 
(RA) 
Coastal Cordillera 
(CC) 
15620 
26 
3% 
RS (20 = 77%), RA 
(6 = 23%) 
R = 0 = 0%/ 
P = 20 =
100% 
R = 0 = 0%/P 
= 6 = 100% 
52 
0.3% 
Central Depression 
(CD) 
23198 
118 
21% 
RS (210 = 97%), 
RA (3 = 3%) 
R = 17 = 8%/ 
P = 193 =
92%) 
R = 0 = 0%/P 
= 3 = 100% 
564 
2.4% 
Western Cordillera 
(WC) 
136033 
862 
76% 
RS (636 = 85%), 
RA (131 = 15%) 
R = 14 =
11%/P = 117 
= 89% 
R = 14 =
11%/P = 117 
= 89% 
3166 
2.3% 
Total 
174851 
1006 
– 
– 
– 
– 
3782 
2.2% 
State of activity: R: Recent or active, P: Paleo. 
Table 2 
Statistic of landslides versus lithology.   
Lithology 
Code 
Lithostratigraphic 
Study area 
Landslides statistic 
Area 
km2 
% 
All 
landslides 
% 
Rockslide 
% 
Rock 
avalanche 
% 
Cenozoic 
Quaternary 
QD 
Quaternary Deposits: colluvial, 
fluvial, glacial, eolian 
37036 
21.2% 
47 
4.7% 
43 
5.0% 
4 
2.9% 
QV 
Quaternary Volcanic: andesitic 
lava, volcanic deposits 
9560 
5.5% 
58 
5.8% 
51 
5.9% 
7 
5.0%  
Cumulative 
46596 
26.7% 
105 
10.5% 
94 
10.9% 
11 
7.9% 
Paleogene- 
Neogene 
V–C 
Volcanic: lava, toba, ignimbrite 
(Barroso Group) 
41126 
23.6% 
232 
23.1% 
190 
21.9% 
42 
30.0% 
SC-C 
Sedimentary Conglomerate 
(Moquegua Formation) 
30950 
17.8% 
224 
22.3% 
216 
24.9% 
8 
5.7% 
VS-C 
Volcano-Sedimentary: 
ignimbrite, toba (Huaylillas 
formation) 
21100 
12.1% 
324 
32.2% 
282 
32.6% 
42 
30.0% 
I–C 
Intrusive rocks: granite 
997 
0.6% 
7 
0.7% 
6 
0.7% 
1 
0.7%  
Cumulative 
94173 
54.1% 
787 
78.3% 
694 
80.1% 
93 
66.4% 
Mesozoic  
V-M 
Volcanic: andesite, rhyolite 
(Toquepala formation) 
8583 
4.9% 
47 
4.7% 
30 
3.5% 
17 
12.1%  
SM-M 
Sediment Marine: limestone and 
shells (Yura Group) 
7232 
4.1% 
48 
4.8% 
33 
3.8% 
15 
10.7%  
I-M 
Intrusive: granite 
12350 
7.1% 
14 
1.4% 
10 
1.2% 
4 
2.9%   
Cumulative 
28165 
16.1% 
109 
10.9% 
73 
8.5% 
36 
25.7% 
Paleozoic  
SM-P 
Sedimentary Marine 
576 
0.3% 
1 
0.1% 
1 
0.1% 
– 
–  
I–P 
Intrusive: granite 
10 
>0.1% 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
–   
Cumulative 
586 
0.3% 
1 
0.1% 
1 
0.1% 
- 
- 
Proterozoic  
I-PP 
Intrusive: granite 
947 
0.5% 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
–  
MR-PP 
Metamorphic Rocks 
3886 
2.2% 
4 
0.4% 
4 
0.5% 
– 
–   
Cumulative 
4833 
2.7% 
4 
0.4% 
4 
0.5%    
F. Delgado et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Journal of South American Earth Sciences 116 (2022) 103824
14
same time, were proposed to explain the slope instabilities in this 
context: groundwater sapping, flood erosion of strong-over-weak stra­
tigraphy, and the toppling of vertically jointed rock (Irwin et al., 2014). 
To the contrary, rock avalanche is almost absent (<5%) from the 
conglomerates of the Moquegua Formation (Table 2), that is rather 
affected by rockslides (~25%) (Table 2). This may be due to the fact that 
this formation has fairly similar overall rock strength, as reported by 
Graber et al. (2020), in addition to being porous and permeable that can 
favor the development of listric failure planes and subsequent rockslides 
such as the Siguas landslide (Lacroix et al., 2019, 2020). 
Finally, we note that the intrusive granite and the metamorphic rocks 
show particularly low susceptibility to large-scale landslides cumulating 
only <3% of the total landslide database (Table 2). 
5.2.2. Landslides versus relief 
In order to explore the link between landslides and relief along the 
western flank of the Central Andes, we analyzed the relationship be­
tween the landslides database and elevation, local relief, mean slope and 
Fig. 13. Landslide statistics versus topography considering (a) and (b) landslide frequency versus elevation, (c) and (d) landslide frequency versus local relief 
(calculated with cells of 2 × 2 km), (e) and (f) landslide frequency versus slope (calculated with a cell of 2 × 2 km). 
F. Delgado et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Journal of South American Earth Sciences 116 (2022) 103824
15
river locations. Most of the mapped landslides (~62%) originate in the 
elevation range between 2500 and 4500 m a.s.l. (Fig. 13a; Fig. 13b) 
corresponding to the Western Cordillera zone (Fig. 6). Another impor­
tant range of concentration is between 1000 and 1500 m a.s.l., which 
corresponds to the Central Depression zone (Fig. 6). Analyzing the cu­
mulative landslide area versus elevation (Fig. 13a; Fig. 13b), we found 
that >50% of the cumulative landslide areas are between 2500 and 
4000 m. a.s.l. (Fig. 13a). This means that landslides are both more 
frequent and larger in this range of elevation, thus contributing more to 
the erosion budget. The higher landslide frequency in this elevation 
range may also be explained by a co-correlation with the lithology of the 
Western Cordillera unit, that is dominated by volcanic Paleogene- 
Neogene rocks, that are highly prone to destabilizations as we have 
previously seen (Fig. 12). 
The comparison between landslides and local relief show a unimodal 
distribution (Fig. 12c). Very few landslides (<5%) are recorded below 
200 m of local relief (Fig. 13c). More than 90% of the landslides origi­
nate between the local relief ranging from 200 to 800 m (Fig. 13c; 
Fig. 13d), with the highest frequency peak between 400 and 600 m 
corresponding to ~50% of the landslides (quartiles Q1 and Q3, 
Fig. 13c). Then, the frequency of landslides is lower for the greater local 
relief, <10% of landslides being located in range 800–1000 m. Finally, 
almost no landslide (<1%) are recorded for the highest local relief 
ranging from 1000 to 1600 m, despite that they are sharing ~8% of the 
total study area (Fig. 13c). Those strong reliefs (1000–1600 m) mainly 
correspond to the deepest and central parts of the Cotahuasi and Majes- 
Colca canyons, that are almost landslide-free (Fig. 13d). Looking at the 
mean slope of the study area, the general pattern of landslides distri­
bution previously described is similar, ~80% of the landslides occurring 
between the range of 10◦and 25◦, with 50% of those originating on 
slopes between 14 and 21◦(Q1 and Q3 respectively). From slopes >30◦, 
the occurrence of landslides is minimal (<2%). 
Those results slightly differ from what is commonly reported from 
others large landslides inventories, where an asymmetric landslide fre­
quency versus relief (or slope) is often obtained: the highest landslide 
frequency being concentrated in the highest local relief (e.g. G¨orum, 
2019; P´anek et al., 2019; Junquera-Torrado et al., 2019). The worldwide 
compilation of large landslides provided by Korup et al. (2007) also 
shows this tendency, half of giant landslides occurring in the steepest 
15% of mountainous terrain. The higher frequency of landslides in the 
steepest relief has been related to the threshold hillslope concept (Korup 
et al., 2007), predicting that above a certain hillslope-angle, or local 
relief, mountain flanks may fail readily because of the limitation of 
landscape-scale rock strength (e.g. Schmidt and Montgomery, 1995; 
Larsen and Montgomery, 2012; Roering, 2012). 
In our study area, we interpret the almost absence of large landslides 
in the areas of extreme relief (1000–1600 m) as due to a lithological 
effect. Indeed, the deepest sections of the Cotahuasi and Majes-Colca 
canyons are incised through strong lithologies such as intrusive 
granite, metamorphic rocks and/or limestone (Fig. 2). Those lithologies 
having great strength, it is probable that those canyon incisions could 
reach such depth without occurrence of large to very large landslides. 
The valley flank erosion in those contexts might be dominated by debris 
flows, scree, which mobilize smaller volumes of rock that are not 
documented in this inventory. On the other hand, looking at the general 
spatial distribution of large landslides at the scale of the study area 
(Fig. 3d) and excepting the cases the central Cotahuasi and Majes-Colca 
canyons, we note that the landslides distribution mainly follows the 
river network and their incisions, where most of the local relief locates 
(Fig. 3c and d). This suggests that the lithological control on large 
landslide susceptibility might dominate, whereas the relief would come 
as secondary. 
5.2.3. Landslides versus seismicity and active faults 
The link between landslide and seismicity has been well documented 
by the literature in the Central Western Andes, either for earthquake- 
induced landslides activity (e.g. Keefer and Moseley, 2004; Lacroix 
et al., 2013; Lacroix et al., 2015) or to tentatively link paleo landslide 
records with the seismogenic context of the Andes (e.g. Mc Philips et al., 
2014; Crosta et al., 2017; Junquera-;Torrado et al., 2021). In Fig. 14, we 
confront the landslide density from this study to the seismicity recorded 
and the main active faults. To what concern the seismicity related to the 
subduction, there is no evidence of an increase of landslide density 
closer to the subduction (Fig. 14). This may be explained by the fact that 
landslides eventually triggered by subduction earthquakes remain 
relatively small (e.g. Lacroix et al., 2013). Indeed, the inventory from 
Lacroix et al. (2013) indicates that the ~866 landslides were triggered 
during the Pisco mega-earthquake (Mw8.0) were (1) relatively small, 
with areas ranging between 10−4 to 10−1 km2; and (2) they mostly 
corresponded to rockfalls and superficial topples along roads. To explain 
the fact that a rather low number of landslides were triggered by this 
Mw8.0 earthquake, while around 105 triggered landslides would be 
predicted for such magnitude (Keefer, 2002), the authors evoked (1) the 
attenuation of the waves due to the depth of the seismic source and its 
distance with the relief (>80 km), (2) the climate setting of the region, 
which long term aridity does not favor soil development and strongly 
limits the bedrock weathering and the groundwater saturation. Obser­
vations were similar for the other historical or recent mega earthquakes 
of subduction such as the Arequipa Mw8.4 (2001) in southern Peru or 
the Iquique Mw8.1 (2014) in northern Chile (Fig. 14), for which no 
observation of triggering, nor reactivation of large landslides (>1 km2) 
were ever reported (see Borrero 2002; Stirling et al., 2002; Candia et al., 
2017). At the plurimillenial-scale, Mc Phillips et al. (2014) suggest a link 
between landslide triggering and subduction earthquakes in the Pisco 
region but again it concerns relatively small landslide sizes from 10−3 to 
10−1 km2. Those different examples strongly contrast with our mapping 
showing a thousand of large to giant landslides (areas up to 180 km2) 
that are well-preserved along the arid Central Western Andes. In sum­
mary, given the previous statements, we suggest that while the sub­
duction seismicity can indeed trigger small to moderate superficial 
landslides and rockfalls, it probably plays a negligible role in forcing 
large-scale and deep-seated landslides in the arid conditions of the 
Western Cordillera. On the other hand, frequent and recurrent subduc­
tion earthquakes (Mw8 has a recurrence of 100–300 yrs; Chlieh et al., 
2011) can contribute to the long-term weathering and rock damage as 
reported by Keefer and Moseley (2004) observing pervasive coseismic 
ground cracking and microfracturing of hillslope during the 2001 Are­
quipa earthquake. 
The other source of seismicity along the Central Western Andes is 
produced by crustal faults activity. In Fig. 14, we confront the landslide 
density to the neotectonic fault network as well as to the crustal seis­
micity. As previously stated (δ2.4), no crustal shallow earthquake of Mw 
> 6 occurred in this region during the last fifty years. One exception is 
the region of Maca (Fig. 14) where a seismic swarm (Mw~5) clearly 
correlates with a landslide cluster. In this region landslides are very 
specific, developing in lacustrine sediments of a paleolake (Zerathe 
et al., 2016), where several studies (Lacroix et al., 2015; Lacroix et al., 
2019; Bontemps et al., 2018; Gaidzik et al., 2020) already pointed the 
effect of frequent local earthquakes linked to the volcanic activity. 
Another interesting point is the well-marked spatial correlation at 
large-scale between the landslide clusters and the neotectonics fault 
pattern (Fig. 14). This correlation can be observed (1) in Peru where 
several landslides clusters are aligned, from Arequipa to Tacna, with the 
Incapuquio Fault System (IFS); and (2) in Chile where the West-Vergent 
Thrust System (WTS) overlaps the main landslide clusters (Fig. 14). 
Several interpretations can be raised. First, those faults play an impor­
tant role in the relief building (e.g. Hall et al., 2008), thus the 
landslide-fault correlation might be indirect, these landslide clusters 
being rather linked to the relief. Second, those faults are associated with 
thick damage zones of kilometer width, where the rock strength is 
decreased and the deep-water circulation along fractures is enhanced. 
Third, there might be a link between paleosismicity and paleo landslide 
F. Delgado et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Journal of South American Earth Sciences 116 (2022) 103824
16
triggering. This discussion is speculative because the timing of paleo­
earthquakes and paleo landslides remain largely undocumented. How­
ever, Benavente et al. (2017b) revealed that tectonic activity occurred 
along the Purgatorio fault in the last thousand years, showing two 
ruptures of ~3 and ~2 m of vertical surface offset, equivalent to seismic 
events of ~Mw7. Evidence of tectonic activities have been also revealed 
along the ~400 km long IFS (Benavente et al., 2021), where paleo­
seismic trenching shows at least 2–3 m of net slip in the last 500 years 
interpreted as single Mw7.4–7.7 earthquake. Basically, the susceptibility 
that a bedrock landslide could be triggered or reactivated by an earth­
quake (Fan et al., 2019) depends on several parameters: (1) the local 
rock mass properties (linked to the lithology, frequency of fractures and 
joint discontinuities, etc.) and the level of hillslope stability, and (2) the 
local ground motion produced by the earthquake that is modulated by 
the distance from the source and local site effect of wave amplification 
(topography, lithological contrast, etc.). For crustal earthquakes, re­
lationships between landslide size and ground motion, with larger and 
deeper landslides associated with higher ground motion, have been re­
ported (Valagussa et al., 2019). Case studies of earthquake-induced 
landslides inventories after an event of Mw7 and beyond showed that 
the larger landslides (>0.1 km2) are found generally in areas where the 
peak ground acceleration exceed 0.5 g, in the close field of the fault (at 
10–20 km of the fault) (Valagussa et al., 2019; Junquera-Torrado et al., 
2021). Therefore, it is likely that some of the inventoried large landslides 
in the western central Andes near the major IFS and WTS faults were 
triggered by past earthquakes along these faults. There is a need for 
more research carried out on the timing of both crustal faults and paleo 
landslides in this part of the Andes. 
5.2.4. Landslides versus rainfall 
Rainfall is the most frequent forcing and triggering factor of mass 
movements in mountainous areas. Physical processes related to the 
addition of water on or below the earth’s surface and their effects on 
slope instabilities are well described by hydro-mechanical models (e.g., 
critical soil-state mechanics and rate-and-state friction) developed from 
numerical theory (Iverson et al., 2000; Baum et al., 2010) coupled to 
laboratory experiments and confronted to in-situ landslide monitoring 
and statistics (Glade et al., 2000; Dai and Lee, 2001). The influence of 
rainfall on landslides differs substantially upon landslide type (typology, 
dimension, depth), the material involved (mechanical and hydrological 
properties) and the characteristic of the rainfall (intensity and duration). 
Groundwater recharge acts as a key factor for slope failures by 
decreasing the resistance of materials due to pore water pressure vari­
ations (Iverson et al., 2000). While shallow landslides (1–2 m depth) are 
usually triggered a few hours or days after the rainfall onset, depending 
on the time required for water infiltration and critical pore pressure 
Fig. 14. Landslides density (from Fig. 8a) along the Central Western Andes confronted to the instrumental seismic catalogues for the last 50 years from USGS 
(earthquakes >Mw5 and depth <30 km), the available historical seismicity and to the main neotectonics crustal faults (see references on the caption of Fig. 3). 
F. Delgado et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Journal of South American Earth Sciences 116 (2022) 103824
17
increase (Iverson et al., 2000; Baum et al., 2010), larger and deeper 
landslides (depth >10 m), which are the case of study in this inventory, 
are more likely to respond to a much longer rainfall duration (months to 
years). Deep-seated landslides are often in subcritical stability state and 
subject to long term creep deformation (Lacroix and Amitrano, 2013). 
These slow movements progressively increase the rock damage and the 
permeability, reducing the whole landslide strength, until the strain 
localizes along basal shear failure surfaces (Eberhardt et al., 2004) and a 
catastrophic collapse can ultimately occur. As shown by recent studies 
(Handwerger et al., 2019; Agliardi et al., 2020), the conditions for the 
collapse triggering are often: (1) the presence of a long-term water table 
water-saturating the basal shear zone; and (2) short-term pore-pressure 
increase linked to rapid water recharges. 
Active landslides are mainly located in the northern part of the study 
area, where the mean annual rainfall is the highest (Fig. 15a). About 
70% of the active landslides are found in areas receiving more than 400 
mm/year of rainfall (Fig. 15b). This is consistent with the threshold of 
500 mm/yr that have been previously documented for the triggering of 
the Colca landslides (Zerathe et al., 2016; Bontemps et al., 2018). On the 
other hand, no active landslides were identified in the desertic 
south-western part of the study area (Fig. 15). One exception is a group 
of active anthropic landslides located ~50 km west of Arequipa (Fig. 15; 
Lacroix et al., 2020; Graber et al., 2021) which develop along the flanks 
of the Siguas and the Vitor valleys (Fig. 16). They correspond actually to 
paleo landslides that have been re-activated for ~40 years due to irri­
gation water input for agricultural lands located just uphill the desta­
bilized valley flanks (Hermann et al., 2012; Araujo et al., 2017; Lacroix 
et al., 2020). Recently, Graber et al. (2021) demonstrated the critical 
role played by the anthropic groundwater table rise for those landslide 
reactivations. Moreover, several other large ancient landslides of the 
same type are located on the opposite valley flanks and they remain 
inactive in the absence of irrigation on those sides (Fig. 16). This sug­
gests that the past activation of those ancient landslides could have been 
linked to climatic conditions that were not the same as nowadays, much 
more humid, allowing local rainfall and long-term natural recharge of 
the water table. 
At large-scale over the whole study area, the distribution of paleo 
landslides is not consistent with the current rainfall pattern. They 
display an inverse relation with rainfall, drier being the region, higher 
being the paleo landslide frequency (Fig. 15c). About 70% of the paleo 
landslides are located in areas that currently receive less than 300 mm/ 
yr of rainfall (Fig. 15c). This distribution might be explained by the fact 
that drier conditions favor long-term preservation of the paleo-landslide 
forms. If more humid, younger failures and erosion would have erased 
those relicts. However, considering the hydro-mechanical conditions 
required for the triggering of deep-seated landslides, it is on the other 
hand very improbable that those collapses occurred in such arid con­
ditions. As shown with many examples in the literature (Odin et al., 
2018) and the cases of Siguas-Vitor valleys (Graber et al., 2021), the 
triggering of those large landslides requires a significant recharge of 
water tables, that are only allowed by perennial rainfall over several 
months to years. Despite producing very strong storms, the intense 
rainfalls linked to only few days long El Ni˜no events are very unlikely to 
feed such groundwater recharge. The rock-hard ground and the lack of 
vegetation does not allow water absorption and only lead to surficial 
erosion and flashfloods (Aguilar et al., 2020). On the other hand, 
ongoing researches on paleoclimate reconstructions in the region show 
that the Atacama Desert and the Central Western Andes could have 
experienced more long-term (years to millennial) climate variability 
during the Pleistocene, as recorded in alluvial fan progradation (Ritter 
et al., 2019, 2020), paleolake development (Ritter et al., 2019), alluvial 
terraces sequences (Steffen et al., 2010) and groundwater discharge 
deposits (Saez et al., 2016). The few giant paleo landslides that were 
dated have failure ages that are consistent with those events (e.g. Aricota 
rockslide, ~18 ka with Henrich Stadial (Delgado et al., 2020); the 
Chuquibamba (~100 ka) and the Caquilluco rock avalanches (100–120 
ka) with the Ouki event (Margirier et al., 2015; Zerathe et al., 2017). It is 
probable that such persistent humid periods have produced sufficient 
aquifer recharge promoting the triggering of those large landslides. 
More dating of landslides coupled with local paleo climatic studies are 
required to disentangle those questions. 
6. Conclusion 
We report in this paper an original inventory of large landslides 
(>0.1 km2) along the hyper arid Central Western Andes (latitudes ca. 
Fig. 15. a) Landslide inventory along the Central Western Andes compared to the mean rainfall of the last two decades; b) and c) Frequency of recent and ancient 
landslides, respectively, versus rainfall patterns. 
F. Delgado et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Journal of South American Earth Sciences 116 (2022) 103824
18
15◦to 20◦S). A systematic mapping of newly identified landslides by 
satellite images, Google Earth and DEMs analysis, added to the compi­
lation of previous works, allows the inventory of more than a thousand 
large slope failures. The destabilized area covers ~3782 km2 and rep­
resents about 2% of the whole study area. Landslide size distribution 
follows a power-law with an exponent of 2.31 ± 0.16 and a cut-off of 4.0 
± 1.9 km2, the largest landslides being up to 180 km2 in size. According 
to the landslide typologies, the rockslides (or coherent landslides) are 
the dominant failure mode representing 86% of the inventory while the 
rock avalanches (granular landslides) represent 14%. The statistical 
analysis of this landslide inventory confronted to topographical, 
geological constraints of this region provides first-order understanding 
about the main conditioning factors of slope failures in the Central 
Western Andes. We identified a combination of a lithological and relief 
effects on landslide distribution. Ignimbrites of the Paleogene-Neogene 
(Hualylillas Formation) concentrate about 30% of the inventoried 
landslides. The majority of landslides has developed along the flanks of 
valleys incising thought the Western Cordillera. Nevertheless, the 
deepest areas of two major canyons (Majes-Colca and Cotahuasi) appear 
less prone to large landslide failure, possibly because they are incising 
through granite. Finally, we identified a control of fracturing and 
weathering related to the long-term fault activity suggested by the 
spatial correlation between landslide clustering and the regional crustal 
faults network. 
This new landslide inventory provides perspectives on the respective 
roles of climatic and seismotectonic forcing’s on the landslide activity in 
the Central Western Andes. Our dataset suggests that subduction seis­
micity play a negligible role in forcing those large landslides, while the 
clustered landslide distribution suggests a more efficient role of crustal 
seismicity. The majority of the mapped landslides corresponds to paleo 
landslides (more than 90%), mainly located in the driest areas (rainfall 
<300 mm/yr). On the other hand, the sole active landslides either an­
thropic, controlled by water infiltration due to irrigation, or either 
located in the northern part of the study area receiving rainfall from the 
Amazonian monsoon (>400 mm/year). We suggest that the triggering of 
those paleo landslides could not have been possible in the dry conditions 
of the Central Western Andes, even during strong earthquakes. Alter­
natively, the period of activity of those paleo landslides may have been 
related to long-term (years to millennial) climate shift toward more 
humid conditions during the Pleistocene, and possibly coupled to 
seismic effect. Next challenging researches will be to add chronological 
constraints on this landslide inventory to explore possible temporal 
correlations between periods of landslide activity and external seismic 
and/or climatic cycles. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Fabrizio Delgado: Writing – original draft, Methodology, 
Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Swann Zerathe: 
Writing – review & editing, Validation, Supervision, Project adminis­
tration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal anal­
ysis, Conceptualization. St´ephane Schwartz: Writing – review & 
editing, Validation, Supervision, Project administration, Investigation, 
Funding acquisition. Bastien Mathieux: Investigation, Formal analysis. 
Carlos Benavente: Supervision, Project administration. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Acknowledgments 
All the data used to perform this study are available in the paper and 
in the supplemental material. This research is part of the PhD project of 
Fabrizio Delgado, and also belong to agreement between IRD and 
INGEMMET. This work was supported by the PhD fellowship program of 
the EDFPCIG, by the TelluS and Alea Programs of CNRS/INSU and by the 
CONCYTEC/FONDECYT in the framework of the call Movilizaciones con 
ECOS Nord-Perú 2019–01 008–2020. We acknowledge the German 
Aerospace Centre (DLR) for providing the TANDEM-X DEM. We 
sincerely acknowledge the anonymous Reviewer and German Aguilar, 
who provided detailed comments that significantly helped to clarify our 
interpretations and a previous version of this manuscript. 
Appendix A. Supplementary data 
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the 
online version, at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsames.2022.103824. 
References 
Acosta, H., Alv´an, A., Mamani, M., Oviedo, M., Rodríguez, J., 2011. Mapa Geol´ogico del 
cuadr´angulo de La Yarada (37-u), Hoja 37-u-IV. Direcci´on de Geología Regional 
(INGEMMET), Lima, Perú. Serie (A), 1 mapa.  
Allmendinger, R.W., Jordan, T.E., Kay, S.M., Isacks, B.L., 1997. The evolution of the 
Altiplano puna of the central Andes. Annu. Rev. Earth Planet Sci. 25, 139–174. 
Armijo, R., Lacassin, R., Coudurier-Curveur, A., Carrizo, D., 2015. Coupled tectonic 
evolution of Andean orogeny and global climate. Earth Sci. Rev. 143, 1–35. 
Audin, L., Bechir, A., 2006. Active tectonics as determinant factor in landslides along the 
western cordillera? Presented at the congreso peruano de Geologia, 13, Lima. 
Resumenes extendidos, Sociedad Geol´ogica del Perú xxii, 237–239. October 17–20.  
Audin, L., H´erail, G., Riquelme, R., Darrozes, J., Martinod, J., Font, E., 2003. 
Geomorphological markers of faulting and neotectonic activity along the western 
Andean margin, northern Chile. J. Quat. Sci. 18 (8), 681–694. 
Audin, L., David, C., Hall, S., Farber, D., H´erail, G., 2006. Geomorphic evidences of 
recent tectonic activity in the forearc, southern Peru. Rev. Asoc. Geol. Argent. 61 (4), 
545–554. 
Fig. 16. Anthropic reactivation of 
paleo landslides induced by irrigation 
for agriculture along (a) the Siguas 
valley modified from Graber et al. 
(2021). See location on Fig. 13. a. The 
Identification of the landslides reac­
tivated by irrigation comes from 
Lacroix et al. (2020) while the loca­
tion of the paleo landslides is from 
this study. Of importance is the fact 
that the re-activation of those paleo 
landslides has need more than 40 
years of constant irrigation to increase 
sufficiently the groundwater level, 
suggesting that a very different 
climate must have been acting there 
at past to produce similar conditions.   
F. Delgado et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Journal of South American Earth Sciences 116 (2022) 103824
19
Audin, L., Lacan, P., Tavera, H., Bondoux, F., 2008. Upper plate deformation and seismic 
barrier in front of Nazca subduction zone: the Chololo Fault System and active 
tectonics along the Coastal Cordillera, southern Peru. Tectonophysics 459, 174–185. 
Baddeley, A., Turner, R., 2005. spatstat: an R package for analyzing spatial point 
patterns. J. Stat. Software 12 (6), 1–42. 
Baddeley, A.D., Hitch, G.J., Allen, R.J., 2020. A Multicomponent Model of Working 
Memory. Oxford University Press, Oxford.  
Barrientos, S., Vera, E., Alvarado, P., Monfret, T., 2004. Crustal seismicity in Central 
Chile. J. South Am. Earth Sci. 16, 759–768. 
Bellido, E., 1979. Geología del cuadr´angulo de Moquegua. INGEMMET, Boletín, Serie A: 
Carta Geol´ogica Nacional 15, 78. 
Bellido Bravo, E., Guevara, C., 1963. Geología de los cuadr´angulos de Punta de Bonbon y 
Clemesi. Com. Carta Geol. Nacional., Lima bol. no 5.  
Bellon, H., Lefevre, Cl, 1916. Donn´ees g´eochronometriques sur le volcanisme andin dans 
le Sud du P´erou. Implications volcano-tectoniques. C. R. Acad. Sci. 283, 1–4. 
Benavente, C., Audin, L., 2009. Geometría, morfología y peligro sísmico de la falla 
Purgatorio Mirave - antearco del sur del Perú. Bol. Soc. Geol. Peru 103 (15), 15–26. 
Benavente, C., Delgado, G., García, B., Aguirre, E., Audin, L., 2017a. Neotect´onica, 
evoluci´on del relieve y peligro sísmico en la regi´on Arequipa. INGEMMET, Boletín 
Serie C: Geodin. Ing. Geol. 64, 370. 
Benavente, C., Zerathe, S., Audin, L., Hall, S., Robert, X., Delgado, F., Farber, D.L., ASTER 
Team., 2017b. Active compressional tectonics in the Andean forearc of southern 
Peru evidenced by direct 10Be surface exposure dating of an active fault scarp. 
Tectonics 36 (9), 1662–1678. 
Benavente, C., Rosell, L., García, B., Palomino, A., Aguirre, E., Taipe, E., Robert, X., 2021. 
Neotect´onica de la regi´on Tacna. INGEMMET, Boletín, Serie C: Geodin. Ing. Geol. 84, 
171 pp., 1 mapa.  
Besag, J., Diggle, P.J., 1977. Simple Monte Carlo tests for spatial pattern. J. Roy. Stat. 
Soc. C-App. 26, 327–333. 
Blanco, N., Tomlinson, A., 2013. Carta Guatacondo, Regi´on de Tarapac´a. Servicio 
Nacional de Geología y Minería, Carta Geol´ogica de Chile. Serie Geología B´asica 156, 
1 mapa escala 1:100.000. Santiago.  
Bontemps, N., Lacroix, P., Doin, M.P., 2018. Inversion of deformation fields time-series 
from optical images, and application to the long term kinematics of slow-moving 
landslides in Peru. Rem. Sens. Environ. 210, 144–158. 
Candia, G., De Pascale, G.P., Montalva, G., Ledezma, C., 2017. Geotechnical aspects of 
the 2015 Mw 8.3 Illapel megathrust earthquake sequence in Chile. Earthq. Spectra 
33 (2), 709–728. 
Casquet, C., Fanning, C.M., Galindo, C., Pankhurst, R.J., Rapela, C.W., Torres, P., 2010. 
The Arequipa massif of Peru: new SHRIMP and isotope constraints on a 
paleoproterozoic inlier in the grenvillian orogen. J. S. Am. Earth Sci. 29 (1), 
128–142. 
Chlieh, M., Perfettini, H., Tavera, H., Avouac, J.P., Remy, D., Nocquet, J.M., 
Rolandone, F., Bondoux, F., Gabalda, G., Bonvalot, S., 2011. Interseismic coupling 
and seismic potential along the Central Andes subduction zone. J. Geophys. Res. 
Solid Earth 116 (B12). https://doi.org/10.1029/2010JB008166. 
Clauset, A., Shalizi, C.R., Newman, M.E., 2009. Power-law distributions in empirical 
data. SIAM Rev. 51, 661–703. 
Cobbing, E.J., Pitcher, W.S., 1972. The coastal batholith of central Peru. J. Geol. Soc. 128 
(5), 421–454. 
Cobbing, E.J., Ozard, J.M., Snelling, N.J., 1977. Reconnaissance geochronology of the 
crystalline basement rocks of the Coastal Cordillera of southern Peru. Geol. Soc. Am. 
Bull. 88 (2), 241–246. 
Crosta, G.B., Hermanns, R.L., Frattini, P., Valbuzzi, E., Valagussa, A., 2014. Large slope 
instabilities in northern Chile: inventory, characterisation and possible triggers. In: 
Proceedings of the 3rd World Landslide Forum, 2–6 June 2014, p. 6. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/978/-3-319-04996-0_28. Bejing.  
Crosta, G.B., Paolo, F., Elena, V., Hermanns, R.L., 2015. The Cerro Caquilluco–Cerrillos 
Negros Giant Rock Avalanches (Tacna, Peru). IAEG, p. N159. Torino 2014.  
Crosta, G.B., Hermanns, R.L., Dehls, J., Lari, S., Sepulveda, S., 2017. Rock avalanches 
clusters along the northern Chile coastal scarp. Geomorphology 289, 27–43. 
Delgado, F., Zerathe, S., Audin, L., Schwartz, S., Benavente, C., Carcaillet, J., Bourles, D. 
L., ASTER Team, 2020. Giant landslide triggerings and paleoprecipitations in the 
Central Western Andes: the aricota rockslide dam (South Peru). Geomorphology 350. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geomorph.2019.106932. 
Dorbath, L., Cisternas, A., Dorbath, C., 1990. Assessment of the size of large and great 
historical earthquakes in Peru. Bull. Seismol. Soc. Am. 80 (3), 551–576. 
Dunai, T.J., Gonzalez L´opez, G.A., Juez-Larr´e, J., 2005. Oligocene–Miocene age ofaridity 
in the Atacama desert revealed by exposure dating of erosion-sensitivelandforms. 
Geology 33 (4), 321–324. 
Eberhardt, E., Stead, D., Coggan, J.S., 2004. Numerical analysis of initiation and 
progressive failure in natural rock slopes—the 1991 Randa rockslide. Int. J. Rock 
Mech. Min. Sci. 41, 69–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1365-1609(03)00076-5. 
Evenstar, L.A., Mather, A.E., Hartley, A.J., Stuart, F.M., Sparks, R.S.J., Cooper, F.J., 
2017. Geomorphology on geologic timescales: evolution of the late cenozoic pacific 
paleosurface in northern Chile and southern Peru. Earth Sci. Rev. 171, 1–27. 
Farías, M., Charrier, R., Comte, D., Martinod, J., H´erail, G., 2005. Late Cenozoic 
deformation and uplift of the western flank of the Altiplano: evidence from the 
depositional, tectonic, and geomorphologic evolution and shallow seismic activity 
(northern Chile at 19◦30’S). Tectonics 24, 1–27. 
Froude, M.J., Petley, D.N., 2018. Global fatal landslide occurrence from 2004 to 2016. 
Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. 18 (8), 2161–2181. 
Gaidzik, K., ˙Zaba, J., Ciesielczuk, J., 2020. Tectonic control on slow-moving andean 
landslides in the Colca valley, Peru. J. Mt. Sci. 17 (8), 1807–1825. 
García, M., Gardeweg, M., Clavero, J., H´erail, G., 2004. Hoja Arica, Regi´on de Tarapac´a. 
Servicio Nacional de Geología y Minería, Carta Geol´ogica de Chile. Serie Geología 
B´asica 84, 150, 1 mapa escala 1:250.000.  
García, M., Fuentes, G., Riquelme, F., 2013. Carta Mi˜nimi˜ni, Regiones de Arica y 
Parinacota y de Tarapac´a. Servicio Nacional de Geología y Minería, Carta Geol´ogica 
de Chile. Serie Geología B´asica 157, 49 pp., 1 mapa escala 1:100.000.  
Gariano, S.L., Guzzetti, F., 2016. Landslides in a changing climate. Earth Sci. Rev. 162, 
227–252. 
Garzione, C.N., Hoke, G.D., Libarkin, J.C., Withers, S., MacFadden, B., Eiler, J., 
Ghosh, P., Mulch, A., 2008. Rise of the Andes. Science 320, 1304–1307. 
Gayo, E.M., Latorre, C., Jordan, T.E., Nester, P.L., Estay, S.A., Ojeda, K.F., Santoro, C.M., 
2012. Late Quaternary hydrological and ecological changes in the hyperarid core of 
the northern Atacama Desert (~ 21 S). Earth Sci. Rev. 113 (3–4), 120–140. 
Gonz´alez, G., Salazar, P., Loveless, J.P., Allmendinger, R.W., Aron, F., Shrivastava, M., 
2015. Upper plate reverse fault reactivation and the unclamping of the megathrust 
during the 2014 northern Chile earthquake sequence. Geology 43 (8), 671–674. 
Goreaud, F., 2000. Apports de l’analyse de la structure spatiale en forˆet temp´er´ee `a 
l’´etude et la mod´elisation des peuplements complexes. Ph.D. thesis. Ecole Nationale 
du G´enie Rural, des Eaux et des Forˆets, France.  
G¨orum, T., 2019. Tectonic, topographic and rock-type influences on large landslides at 
the northern margin of the Anatolian Plateau. Landslides 16, 333–346. 
Gunnell, Y., Thouret, J.C., Brichau, S., Carter, A., Gallagher, K., 2010. Low-temperature 
thermochronology in the Peruvian Central Andes: implications for long-term 
continental denudation, timing of plateau uplift, canyon incision and lithosphere 
dynamics. J. Geol. Soc. 167 (4), 803–815. 
Guzzetti, F., Cardinali, M., Reichenbach, P., 1996. The influence of structural setting and 
lithology on landslide type and pattern. Environ. Eng. Geosci. 2 (4), 531–555. 
Guzzetti, F., Carrara, A., Cardinali, M., Reichenbach, P., 1999. Landslide hazard 
evaluation: a review of current techniques and their application in a multi-scale 
study, Central Italy. Geomorphology 31 (1–4), 181–216. 
Guzzetti, F., Malamud, B.D., Turcotte, D.L., Reichenbach, P., 2002. Power-law 
correlations of landslide areas in central Italy. Earth Planet Sci. Lett. 195, 169–183. 
Guzzetti, F., Mondini, A.C., Cardinali, M., Fiorucci, F., Santangelo, M., Chang, K.T., 2012. 
Landslide inventory maps: new tools for an old problem. Earth Sci. Rev. 112, 42–66. 
Hall, S.R., Farber, D.L., Audin, L., Finkel, R.C., M´eriaux, A.S., 2008. Geochronology of 
pediment surfaces in southern Peru: implications for Quaternary deformation of the 
Andean forearc. Tectonophysics 459 (1), 186–205. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
tecto.2007.11.073. 
Hansen, A., 1984. Engineering geomorphology: the application of an evolutionary model 
of Hong Kong’s terrain. Z. Geomorphol. 51, 39–50. 
Haque, U., Da Silva, P.F., Devoli, G., Pilz, J., Zhao, B., Khaloua, A., Glass, G.E., 2019. The 
human cost of global warming: deadly landslides and their triggers (1995–2014). 
Sci. Total Environ. 682, 673–684. 
Hartley, A.J., Chong, G., 2002. Late pliocene age for the Atacama Desert: implications for 
the desertification of western south America. Geology 30 (1), 43–46. 
Haschke, M., Günther, A., Melnick, D., Echtler, H., Reutter, K.J., Scheuber, E., 
Oncken, O., 2006. Central and southern Andean tectonic evolution inferred from arc 
magmatism. In: The Andes. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 337–353. 
Henriques, C., Zˆezere, J.L., Marques, F., 2015. The role of the lithological setting on the 
landslide pattern and distribution. Eng. Geol. 189, 17–31. 
Houston, J., Hartley, A.J., 2003. The Central Andean west-slope rainshadow and its 
potential contribution to the origin of hyper-aridity in the Atacama Desert. Int. J. 
Climatol. 23, 1453–1464. 
Irwin III, R.P., Tooth, S., Craddock, R.A., Howard, A.D., de Latour, A.B., 2014. Origin and 
development of theater-headed valleys in the Atacama Desert, northern Chile: 
morphological analogs to martian valley networks. Icarus 243, 296–310. 
Isacks, B.L., 1988. Uplift of the central Andean plateau and bending of the Bolivian 
orocline. J. Geophys. Res. 93, 3211–3231. 
Jacay, J., Sempere, T., Husson, L., Pino, A., 2002. Structural characteristics of the 
Incapuquio fault system, southern Peru. In: V International Symposium on Andean 
Geodynamics ISAG, Extended Abstracts, pp. 319–321. Toulouse, France.  
James, D.E., Sacks, I.S., 1999. Cenozoic formation of the Central Andes: a geophysical 
perspective. In: Skinner, B.J. (Ed.), Geology and Ore Deposits of the Central Andes, 
vol. 7. Society of Economic Geologists, Special Publication, pp. 1–25. 
Junquera-Torrado, S., Moreiras, S.M., Sepúlveda, S.A., 2019. Distribution of landslides 
along the Andean active orogenic front (Argentinean Precordillera 31–33◦S). Quat. 
Int. 512, 18–34. 
Junquera-Torrado, S., Moreiras, S.M., Rodriguez-Peces, M.J., Sepulveda, S.A., 2021. 
Linking earthquake-triggered paleolandslides to their seismic source and to the 
possible seismic event that originated them in a portion of the Argentine 
Precordillera (31◦–33◦S). Nat. Hazards 106, 43–78. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s11069-020-04447-1. 
Keefer, D.K., 2002. Investigating landslides caused by earthquakes–a historical review. 
Surv. Geophys. 23 (6), 473–510. 
Keefer, D.K., Moseley, M.E., 2004. Southern Peru desert shattered by the great 2001 
earthquake: implications for paleoseismic and paleo-El Ni˜no–Southern Oscillation 
records. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. Unit. States Am. 101 (30), 10878–10883. 
Keefer, D.K., Moseley, M.E., DeFrance, S.D., 2003. A 38 000-year record of floods and 
debris flows in the Ilo region of southern Peru and its relation to El Ni˜no events and 
great earthquakes. Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol. 194 (1–3), 41–77. 
Kelleher, J.A., 1972. Rupture zones of large South American earthquakes and some 
predictions. J. Geophys. Res. 77 (11), 2087–2103. 
Korup, O., Clague, J.J., Hermanns, R.L., Hewitt, K., Strom, A.L., Weidinger, J.T., 2007. 
Giant landslides topography and erosion. Earth Planet Sci. Lett. 261, 578–589. 
F. Delgado et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Journal of South American Earth Sciences 116 (2022) 103824
20
Kumar, S., Gupta, V., 2021. Evaluation of spatial probability of landslides using bivariate 
and multivariate approaches in the Goriganga valley, Kumaun Himalaya, India. Nat. 
Hazards 1–28. 
Kumar, V., Gupta, V., Jamir, I., Chattoraj, S.L., 2019. Evaluation of potential landslide 
damming: case study of Urni landslide, Kinnaur, Satluj valley, India. Geosci. Front. 
10 (2), 753–767. 
Lacroix, P., Amitrano, D., 2013. Long-term dynamics of rockslides and damage 
propagation inferred from mechanical modeling. J. Geophys. Res.: Earth Surf. 118 
(4), 2292–2307. 
Lacroix, P., Zavala, B., Berthier, E., Audin, L., 2013. Supervised method of landslide 
inventory using panchromatic SPOT5 images and application to the earthquake- 
triggered landslides of Pisco (Peru, 2007, Mw8. 0). Rem. Sens. 5 (6), 2590–2616. 
Lacroix, P., Berthier, E., Taipe, E., 2015. Earthquake-driven acceleration of slow-moving 
landslides in the Colca valley, Peru, detected from Pl´eiades images. Rem. Sens. 
Environ. 165, 148–158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2015.05.010. 
Lacroix, P., Araujo, G., Hollingsworth, J., Taipe, E., 2019. Self-entrainment motion of a 
slow-moving landslide inferred from landsat-8 time series. J. Geophys. Res.: Earth 
Surf. 124 (5), 1201–1216. 
Lacroix, P., Dehecq, A., Taipe, E., 2020. Irrigation-triggered landslides in a Peruvian 
desert caused by modern intensive farming. Nat. Geosci. 13 (1), 56–60. 
Larsen, I.J., Montgomery, D.R., 2012. Landslide erosion coupled to tectonics and river 
incision. Nat. Geosci. 5 (7), 468–473. 
Lavenu, A., 2005. Fallas Cuaternarias de Chile, vol. 62. Servicio Nacional de Geología y 
Minería, Boletín, Santiago, p. 71. 
Lavenu, A., Thiele, R., Machette, M., Dart, R., Bradley, L., Haller, K., 2000. Maps and 
Database of Quaternary Faults in Bolivia and Chile, p. 50. U.S. Geological Survey 
Open-File Report 00-283.  
Leyton, F., Ruiz, S., Sepúlveda, S., 2010. Reevaluaci´on del peligro sísmico probabilístico 
en Chile Central. Andean Geol. 37 (2), 455–472. https://doi.org/10.5027/ 
andgeoV37n2-a11. 
Litty, C., Duller, R., Schlunegger, F., 2016. Paleohydraulic reconstruction of a 40 ka-old 
terrace sequence implies that water discharge was larger than today. Earth Surf. 
Process. Landforms 41 (7), 884–898. 
Malamud, B.D., Turcotte, D.L., Guzzetti, F., Reichenbach, P., 2004. Landslides, 
earthquakes, and erosion. Earth Planet Sci. Lett. 229 (1–2), 45–59. 
Mamani, M., Tassara, A., W¨orner, G., 2008. Composition and structural control of crustal 
domains in the central Andes. G-cubed 9 (3). https://doi.org/10.1029/ 
2007GC001925. 
Mamani, M., W¨orner, G., Sempere, T., 2009. Geochemical variations in igneous rocks of 
the Central Andean Orocline (13◦to 18◦S): tracing crustal thickening and magma 
generation through time and space. Geol. Soc. Am. Bull. 122, 162–182. https://doi. 
org/10.1130/B26538.1. 
Mamani, M., Navarro, P., Carlotto, V., Acosta, H., Rodriguez, J., Jaimes, F., Santos, A., 
Rodríguez, R., Chavez, L., Cueva, E., Cereceda, C., 2010. Arcos magm´aticos meso- 
cenozoicos del Perú. In: XV Congreso Peruano de Geología, Cusco. Sociedad 
Geol´ogica del Perú, Resúmenes Extendidos, pp. 563–566. 
Mamani, M., Rodriguez, R., Acosta, H., Jaimes, F., Navarro, P., Carlotto, V., 2012. 
Caracteristicas litol´ogicas y geoquímicas m´as resaltantes de los arcos magm´aticos del 
Peru desde el Ordovicico. XVI Congreso Peruano de Geologia, p. 5 resúmenes 
extendidos.  
Marc, O., Stumpf, A., Malet, J.P., Gosset, M., Uchida, T., Chiang, S.H., 2018. Towards a 
global database of rainfall-induced landslide inventories: first insights from past and 
new events. Earth Surf. Dyn. Discuss. https://doi.org/10.5194/esurf-2018-20. 
Margirier, A., Audin, L., Carcaillet, J., Schwartz, S., 2015. Tectonic and climatic controls 
on the Chuquibamba landslide (western Andes, southern Peru). Earth Surf. Dynam. 
Discuss. 2, 1129–1153. 
Mari˜no, J., Samaniego, P., Manrique, N., Valderrama, P., Roche, O., de Vries, B.V.W., 
Liorzou, C., 2021. The Tutupaca volcanic complex (Southern Peru): eruptive 
chronology and successive destabilization of a dacitic dome complex. J. S. Am. Earth 
Sci. 109, 103227. 
Martinod, J., G´erault, M., Husson, L., Regard, V., 2020. Widening of the Andes: an 
interplay between subduction dynamics and crustal wedge tectonics. Earth Sci. Rev. 
204, 103170. 
Mather, A.E., Hartley, A.J., Griffiths, J.S., 2014. The giant coastal landslides of Northern 
Chile: tectonic and climate interactions on a classic convergent plate margin. Earth 
Planet Sci. Lett. 388, 249–256. 
Medwedeff, W.G., Clark, M.K., Zekkos, D., West, A.J., 2020. Characteristic landslide 
distributions: an investigation of landscape controls on landslide size. Earth Planet 
Sci. Lett. 539, 116203. 
Monge, R., Cervantes, J., 2000. Memoria explicativa de la geología del cuadr´angulo de 
Pachía (36v) y Palca (36x). Direcci´on de Geología Regional del INGEMMET, Lima, 
Perú, p. 11. 
Montgomery, D.R., 2001. Slope distributions, threshold hillslopes, and steady-state 
topography. Am. J. Sci. 301 (4–5), 432–454. 
Morand´e, J., Gallardo, F., Farías, M., 2015. Carta Guavi˜na, Regi´on de Tarapac´a. Servicio 
Nacional de Geología y Minería, Carta Geol´ogica de Chile. Serie Geología B´asica 177, 
1 mapa escala 1:100.000.  
Mukasa, S.B., Henry, D.J., 1990. The San Nicolas batholith of coastal Peru: early 
Palaeozoic continental arc or continental rift magmatism? J. Geol. Soc. 147 (1), 
27–39. 
New, M., Lister, D., Hulme, M., Makin, I., 2002. A high-resolution data set of surface 
climate over global land areas. Clim. Res. 21 (1), 1–25. 
Newell, N.D., 1945. Investigaciones geol´ogicas en las zonas circunvecinas al lago 
Titicaca. Boletín Sociedad Geol´ogica del Perú 18, 44–68. 
P´anek, T., 2019. Landslides and Quaternary climate changes—the state of the art. Earth 
Sci. Rev. 196, 102871. 
P´anek, T., Bˇreˇzný, M., Kapustov´a, V., Lenart, J., Chalupa, V., 2019. Large landslides and 
deep-seated gravitational slope deformations in the Czech Flysch Carpathians: new 
LiDAR-based inventory. Geomorphology 346, 106852. 
Pardo-Casas, F., Molnar, P., 1987. Relative motion of the Nazca (farallon) and south- 
American plates since late cretaceous time. Tectonics 6, 233–248. 
Petley, D., 2012. Global patterns of loss of life from landslides. Geology 40 (10), 
927–930. 
Pinto, L., H´erail, G., Charrier, R., 2004. Sedimentaci´on sintect´onica asociada a las 
estructuras Ne´ogenas en la Precordillera de la zona de Moquella (19◦15’S, norte de 
Chile). Rev. Geol. Chile 31 (1), 19–44. https://doi.org/10.5027/andgeoV31n1-a02. 
Pinto, L., H´erail, G., Fontan, F., de Parseval, 2007. Neogene erosion and uplift of the 
western edge of the Andean Plateau as determined by detrital heavy mineral 
analysis. Sediment. Geol. 195, 217–237. 
Pinto, L., H´erail, G., Sepúlveda, S.A., Krop, P., 2008. A Neogene giant landslide in 
Tarapac´a, northern Chile: a signal of instability of the westernmost Altiplano and 
palaeoseismicity effects. Geomorphology 102 (3–4), 532–541. 
Placzek, C.J., Quade, J., Patchett, P.J., 2013. A 130 ka reconstruction of rainfall on the 
Bolivian Altiplano. Earth Planet Sci. Lett. 363, 97–108. 
Pradhan, B., Lee, S., 2010. Landslide susceptibility assessment and factor effect analysis: 
backpropagation artificial neural networks and their comparison with frequency 
ratio and bivariate logistic regression modelling. Environ. Model. Software 25 (6), 
747–759. 
Proyecto Multinacional Andino), P.M.A.(, 2009. Geociencia para las Comunidades 
Andinas. Atlas de deformaciones cuaternarias de los Andes. Servicio Nacional de 
Geología y Minería, Publicaci´on Geol´ogica Multinacional 7, 320 pp., 1 mapa en CD. 
Santiago.  
Quade, J., Rech, J.A., Betancourt, J.L., Latorre, C., Quade, B., Rylander, K.A., Fisher, T., 
2008. Paleowetlands and regional climate change in the central Atacama Desert, 
northern Chile. Quat. Res. 69 (3), 343–360. 
Quang, C.X., Clark, A.H., Lee, J.K., Hawkes, N., 2005. Response of supergene processes to 
episodic Cenozoic uplift, pediment erosion, and ignimbrite eruption in the porphyry 
copper province of southern Peru. Econ. Geol. 100 (1), 87–114. 
R Core Team, 2019. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R 
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. https://www.R-project.org/.  
Ripley, B.D., 1977. Modelling spatial patterns. J. Roy. Stat. Soc. B 39 (2), 172–212. 
Ritter, B., Binnie, S.A., Stuart, F.M., Wennrich, V., Dunai, T.J., 2018. Evidence for 
multiple Plio-Pleistocene lake episodes in the hyperarid Atacama Desert. Quat. 
Geochronol. 44, 1–12. 
Ritter, B., Wennrich, V., Medialdea, A., Brill, D., King, G., Schneiderwind, S., 
Niemann, K., Fern´andez-Galego, E., Diederich, J., Rolf, C., Bao, R., Melles, M., 
Dunai, T.J., 2019. Climatic fluctuations in the hyperarid core of the Atacama Desert 
during the past 215 ka. Sci. Rep. 9 (1), 1–13. 
Rivera, M., Samaniego, P., Vela, J., Le Pennec, J.L., Guillou, H., Paquette, J.L., 
Liorzou, C., 2020. The eruptive chronology of the Yucamane-Calientes compound 
volcano: a potentially active edifice of the Central Andes (southern Peru). 
J. Volcanol. Geoth. Res. 393, 106787. 
Roering, J., 2012. Landslides limit mountain relief. Nat. Geosci. 5 (7), 446–447. 
Roperch, P., Sempere, T., Macedo, O., Arriagada, C., Fornari, M., Tapia, C., García, M., 
Laj, C., 2006. Counterclockwise rotation of late Eocene-Oligocene fore-arc deposits 
in southern Perú and its significance for oroclinal bending in the central Andes. 
Tectonics 25 (3), 1–29. https://doi.org/10.1029/2005TC001882. 
Salinas, E., 1985. Evoluci´on paleogeogr´afica del Sur del Perú a la luz de los m´etodos de 
an´alisis sedimentol´ogico de las series del Departamento de Tacna. Tesis de grado. 
UNSA, Arequipa.  
S´anchez-Nú˜nez, J.M., G´omez, J.C., Macías, J.L., Arce, J.L., 2020. Pleistocene rock 
avalanche, damming, and secondary debris flow along the Cotahuasi river, Peru. 
J. S. Am. Earth Sci. 104, 102901. 
Santib´a˜nez, I., Cembrano, J., García, T., Costa, C., Ya˜nez, G., Marquardt, C., 
Arancibia, G., Gonz´alez, G., 2019. Crustal faults in the chilean Andes: geological 
constraints and seismic potential. Andean Geol. 46, 32–65. 
Schildgen, T.F., Hodges, K.V., Whipple, K.X., Reiners, P.W., Pringle, M.S., 2007. Uplift of 
the western margin of the Andean plateau revealed from canyon incision history, 
southern Peru. Geology 35, 523–526. 
Schildgen, T.F., Hodges, K.V., Whipple, K.X., Pringle, M.S., van Soest, M., Cornell, K., 
2009. Late Cenozoic structural and tectonic development of the western margin of 
the central Andean Plateau in southwest Peru. Tectonics 28, TC4007. https://doi. 
org/10.1029/2008TC002403. 
Schildgen, T.F., Balco, G., Schuster, G., 2010. Canyon incision and knickpoint 
propagation recorded by apatite 4 He/3 He thermochronometry. Earth Planet Sci. 
Lett. 293, 377–387. 
Schmidt, K.M., Montgomery, D.R., 1995. Limits to relief. Science 270 (5236), 617–620. 
Sobolev, S.V., Babeyko, A.Y., 2005. What drives orogeny in the Andes? Geology 33 (8), 
617–620. 
Somoza, R., 1998. Updated Nazca (Farallon) - south America relative motions during the 
last 40 My: implications for mountain building in the central Andean region. J. S. 
Am. Earth Sci. 11, 211–215. 
Stead, D., Wolter, A., 2015. A critical review of rock slope failure mechanisms: the 
importance of structural geology. J. Struct. Geol. 74, 1–23. 
Steffen, D., Schlunegger, F., Preusser, F., 2010. Late Pleistocene fans and terraces in the 
Majes valley, southern Peru, and their relation to climatic variations. Int. J. Earth 
Sci. 99 (8), 1975–1989. 
Stirling, M.W., Langridge, R., Benites, R., Aleman, H., 2002. The Magnitude 8.3 June 23 
2001 Southern Peru Earthquake and Tsunami: Reconnaissance Team Report. 
Institute of Geological & Nuclear Sciences. 
F. Delgado et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Journal of South American Earth Sciences 116 (2022) 103824
21
Strasser, M., Schlunegger, F., 2005. Erosional processes, topographic length-scales and 
geomorphic evolution in arid climatic environments: the ‘Lluta collapse’, northern 
Chile. Int. J. Earth Sci. 94 (3), 433–446. 
Strecker, M.R., Alonso, R.N., Bookhagen, B., Carrapa, B., Hilley, G.E., Sobel, E.R., 
Trauth, M.H., 2007. Tectonics and climate of the southern central Andes. Annu. Rev. 
Earth Planet Sci. 35, 747–787. 
Tanyas¸, H., Van Westen, C.J., Allstadt, K.E., Anna Nowicki Jessee, M., G¨orüm, T., 
Jibson, R.W., Hovius, N., 2017. Presentation and analysis of a worldwide database of 
earthquake-induced landslide inventories. J. Geophys. Res.: Earth Surf. 122 (10), 
1991–2015. 
Tanyas¸, H., van Westen, C.J., Allstadt, K.E., Jibson, R.W., 2019. Factors controlling 
landslide frequency–area distributions. Earth Surf. Process. Landforms 44 (4), 
900–917. 
Tebbens, S.F., 2020. Landslide scaling: a review. Earth Space Sci. 7 (1), e2019EA000662. 
Thouret, J.C., W¨orner, G., Gunnell, Y., Singer, B., Zhang, X., Souriot, T., 2007. 
Geochronologic and stratigraphic constrains on canyon incision and Miocene uplift 
of the Central Andes in Perú. Earth Planet Sci. Lett. 263, 151–166. 
Thouret, J.C., Gunnell, Y., Jicha, B.R., Paquette, J.L., Braucher, R., 2017. Canyon incision 
chronology based on ignimbrite stratigraphy and cut-and-fill sediment sequences in 
SW Peru documents intermittent uplift of the western Central Andes. 
Geomorphology 298, 1–19. 
Tomlinson, A., Blanco, N., Ladino, M., 2015. Carta Mami˜na, Regi´on de Tarapac´a. 
Servicio Nacional de Geología y Minería, Carta Geol´ogica de Chile. Serie Geología 
B´asica 174, 1 mapa escala 1:100.000. Santiago.  
Tonini, M., Pedrazzini, A., Penna, I., Jaboyedoff, M., 2014. Spatial pattern of landslides 
in Swiss rhone valley. Nat. Hazards 73, 97–110. 
Valagussa, A., Marc, O., Frattini, P., Crosta, G.B., 2019. Seismic and geological controls 
on earthquake-induced landslide size. Earth Planet Sci. Lett. 506, 268–281. 
Valdivia-Silva, J.E., Navarro-Gonz´alez, R., Ortega-Gutierrez, F., Fletcher, L.E., Perez- 
Montano, S., Condori-Apaza, R., McKay, C.P., 2011. Multidisciplinary approach of 
the hyperarid desert of Pampas de La Joya in southern Peru as a new Mars-like soil 
analog. Geochem. Cosmochim. Acta 75 (7), 1975–1991. 
Valenzuela, J.I., Herrera, S., Pinto, L., Del Real, I., 2014. Carta Cami˜na, regiones de 
Arica-Parinacota y Tarapac´a. Servicio Nacional de Geología y Minería, Carta 
Geol´ogica de Chile. Serie Geología B´asica 170, 97 pp., 1 mapa escala 1:100.000.  
Van Den Eeckhaut, M., Poesen, J., Govers, G., Verstraeten, G., Demoulin, A., 2007. 
Characteristics of the size distribution of recent and historical landslides in a 
populated hilly region. Earth Planet Sci. Lett. 256, 588–603. 
Varnes, D.J., 1978. Slope movement types and processes. Sp. Rep. 176, 11–33. 
Vicente, J.C., 1981. Elementos de la estratigrafía Mesozoica sur Peruana. In: Volkheimer, 
Musacchio (Eds.), Comit´e Sudamericano del Jur´asico y Cret´acico: Cuencas 
sedimentarias del Jur´asico y Cret´acico de Am´erica del sur, vol. 1, pp. 319–351. 
Villegas-Lanza, J.C., Chlieh, M., Cavali´e, O., Tavera, H., Baby, P., Chire-Chira, J., 
Nocquet, J.M., 2016. Active tectonics of Peru: heterogeneous interseismic coupling 
along the Nazca megathrust, rigid motion of the Peruvian Sliver, and Subandean 
shortening accommodation. J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth 121 (10), 7371–7394. 
Wallemacq, P., House, R., 2018. Economic Losses, Poverty & Disasters. Centre for 
Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters and United Nations Office for Disaster 
Risk Reduction, Geneva, pp. 1–30. 
Whipple, K.X., Kirby, E., Brocklehurst, S.H., 1999. Geomorphic limits to climate-induced 
increases in topographic relief. Nature 401 (6748), 39–43. 
Wilson, J., García, W., 1962. Geología de los Cuadr´angulos de Pachia y Palca. Comisi´on 
de la Carta Geol´ogica Nacional 2 (4), 1–81. 
W¨orner, G., Hammerschmidt, K., Henjes-Kunst, F., Lezaun, J., Wilke, H., 2000. 
Geochronology (40Ar/39Ar, K-Ar and He-exposure ages) of Cenozoic magmatic 
rocks from northern Chile (18-22◦S): implications for magmatism and tectonic 
evolution of the central Andes. Rev. Geol. Chile 27, 205–240. 
W¨orner, G., Uhlig, D., Kohler, I., Seyfried, H., 2002. Evolution of the West Andean 
Escarpment at 18 S (N. Chile) during the last 25 Ma: uplift, erosion and collapse 
through time. Tectonophysics 345 (1–4), 183–198. 
Wu, X., Chen, X., Zhan, F.B., Hong, S., 2015. Global research trends in landslides during 
1991–2014: a bibliometric analysis. Landslides 12, 1215–1226. 
Yilmaz, I., Ercanoglu, M., 2019. Landslide inventory, sampling and effect of sampling 
strategies on landslide susceptibility/hazard modelling at a glance. In: Natural 
Hazards GIS-Based Spatial Modeling Using Data Mining Techniques. Springer, Cham, 
pp. 205–224. 
Zavala, B., Mari˜no, J., Lacroix, P., Taipe, E., Tatard, L., Benavente, C., Pari, W., 
Macedo, L., Pe˜na, E., Paxi, R., Delgado, F., Fídel, L., Vilchez, M., Gomez, J.C., 2013. 
Evaluacion de la seguridad fisica del distrito de Maca, Estudio geologicos, geofisicos 
y monitoreo de movimientos en masa. INGEMMET-IRD-IGP Publications, Lima. 
Informe Tecnico No. A6628.  
Zerathe, S., Lacroix, P., Jongmans, D., Marino, J., Taipe, E., Wathelet, M., Pari, W., 
Fidel, L., Norabuena, E., Guillier, B., Tatard, L., 2016. Morphology, structure and 
kinematics of a rainfall controlled slow-moving Andean landslide, Peru. Earth Surf. 
Process. Landforms 41 (11), 1477–1493. 
Zerathe, S., Blard, P.H., Audin, L., Braucher, R., Bourles, D., Carcaillet, J., Benavente, C., 
Delgado, F., AsterTeam, 2017. Toward the feldspar alternative for cosmogenic 10Be 
exposure dating. Quat. Geochronol. 41, 83–96. 
F. Delgado et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
