Wood supply optimization in brazilian pulp...
Revista Árvore 2019;43(5):e430504
1
WOOD SUPPLY OPTIMIZATION IN BRAZILIAN PULP INDUSTRY INVOLVING 
FORESTRY OUTGROWER SCHEME
Matheus Andrade Ferreira2*     , Carolina Souza Jarochinski e Silva3     , Lucas Rezende Gomide3      , Marco Anto-
nio Contreras4     ,Ezio Tadeu Lopes5     , Rafael Carvalho Rodrigues6      ,José Márcio de Mello3       and Nathalia de 
Paiva Mendonça2  
1 Received on 01.04.2019 accepted for publication on 30.08.2019.
2 Suzano Papel e Celulose, Aracuz, ES - Brasil. E-mail: <matheusandrade.bs@gmail.com> and <nathalia.p.mendonca@hotmail.com>.
3 Universidade Federal de Lavras, Departamento de Engenharia Florestal, Lavras, MG - Brasil. E-mail: <carolsjs@gmail.com> 
<lucasgomide@uﬂ a.br> and <josemarcio@dcf.uﬂ a.br>.
4 Universidad Austral de Chile, Instituto de Bosques y Sociedad, Facultad de Ciencias Forestales y Recursos Naturales, Valdivia, Chile. 
E-mail: <marco.contreras@uach.cl>.
5 Universidade de Brasília, Departamento de Engenharia Florestal, Brasília, DF - Brasil. E-mail: <ezio.lopes@uol.com.br>.
6 Universidade Federal de Viçosa, Departamento de Engenharia Florestal, Viçosa , MG - Brasil. E-mail: <rcrvix@hotmail.com>.
*Corresponding author.
ABSTRACT – The objective of this study was to identify the best regions for allocation of a forestry outgrower 
scheme, and the most eﬃ  cient transportation system, using a mathematical programming model to minimize 
the wood supply costs in three Brazilian states. The forest outgrower scheme is a partnership between 
producers and forest companies, without land acquisition by the companies. Forest producers are recognized as 
an important source of growth for forest production. In order to achieve successful partnerships, the company 
needs to plan its hiring.  In this study, the partnerships are made through formal contracts and the model does 
not allow breach of contract. Six scenarios were modeled and evaluated based on the total cost of the objective 
function, average wood cost (USD/m³), average transport distance (km) and processing time. The mathematical 
model showed its eﬃ  ciency, eﬀ ectiveness, and ﬂ exibility in generating scenarios to support company managers 
in the decision-making and to avoid breach of contract. Hiring planning beneﬁ ts both sides as it ensures the 
company’s production and provides ﬁ nancial security to forest producers. In addition, the model suggests 
alternatives such as the diﬀ erential pricing of wood according to the location of the regions and the formation 
of homogeneous blocks of contracting/renewal of outgrower schemes around the pulp mill. 
Keywords: Tactical Planning; Linear Programming; Forest Outgrower Scheme
OTIMIZAÇÃO DO SUPRIMENTO DE MADEIRA NA INDÚSTRIA DE CELULOSE 
BRASILEIRA ENVOLVENDO FOMENTOS FLORESTAIS
RESUMO – O objetivo deste estudo foi identiﬁ car as melhores regiões para alocação de fomentos ﬂ orestais e 
sistemas de transporte mais eﬁ cientes, utilizando um modelo de programação matemática, para minimizar os 
custos de suprimento de madeira em três estados brasileiros. O fomento ﬂ orestal é uma parceria entre produtores 
e empresas ﬂ orestais, sem aquisição de terra por parte das empresas. Os produtores ﬂ orestais são reconhecidos 
como uma importante fonte de plantio para a produção ﬂ orestal. Para planejar parcerias bem-sucedidas, a 
empresa precisa planejar suas contratações. No presente estudo, foi considerado que as parcerias são realizadas 
por meio de contratos formais e que esse modelo de contratação não permite a quebra de contrato. Seis cenários 
foram modelados e avaliados com base no custo total da função objetivo, custo médio da madeira (USD/m³), 
distância média de transporte (km) e tempo de processamento. O modelo matemático mostrou sua eﬁ ciência, 
efetividade e ﬂ exibilidade na geração de cenários para apoiar os gestores da empresa nas tomadas de decisões e 
evitar quebras de contrato. O planejamento da contratação beneﬁ cia ambos os lados, pois garante a produção da 
empresa e fornece segurança ﬁ nanceira aos produtores ﬂ orestais. Além disso, o modelo sugere alternativas como 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/1806-90882019000500004
Article
FERREIRA MA et al.
Revista Árvore 2019;43(5):e430504
2
o preço da madeira diferenciado de acordo com a localização das regiões e a formação de blocos homogêneos de 
contratação/renovação de fomentos no entorno da fábrica de celulose.
Palavras-Chave: Planejamento tático; Programação linear, Fomento Florestal.
1.INTRODUCTION
In the last several decades, the expansion of 
agribusinesses in Brazil has caused a greater land 
appreciation, 
making 
agribusiness 
development 
unfeasible in areas of high population density. This 
competitive environment of land use has increased 
interest in the forest outgrower scheme. This scheme 
is a partnership between tree growers and forest 
companies, without land acquisition by companies, 
that promotes alternative income for small and 
medium-sized landowners (Rode et al., 2014). 
According to Oliveira et al. (2006) and Rezende 
et al. (2006), outgrower schemes are a feasible option 
to increase the production of raw material because 
capital mobilization by forest companies is not 
required for land purchase, making possible smaller 
short-term investments. Meanwhile,  advantages for 
outgrowers are the guaranteed sale of wood, technical 
assistance, and ﬁ nancial assistance with credits and 
readjustments (Rezende et al., 2006; Silva et al., 
2009). Fischer and Zylbersztajn (2012) argued that 
wood originating from outgrower schemes plays a 
major role in the Brazilian pulp industry, occupying 
the second place in the matrix of raw material in long-
term contracts. 
Nonetheless, given the large distances between 
forest stands and the mills, the demand for wood 
requires an eﬃ  cient logistical structure to reduce 
operational costs. Because Brazil is large and 
encompasses diverse environments, it has a diverse 
transportation system with 52% being roads, 30% rail, 
8% seaway, 5% waterways, and 5% pipelines. In the 
Brazilian states of Espírito Santo, southern Bahia and 
northeastern Minas Gerais, there are three available 
modes of transportation (road, maritime and rail), 
which is diﬀ erent from most of the country where 
road transportation is the predominant system. This 
makes forest optimization more complex due to the 
large number of variables involved in the process such 
as distance between forest and mills, transportation 
systems, and the costs of maintenance, fuel, oil and 
lubricant, among others (Berger et al., 2003). The 
use of decision support systems is fundamental to 
improve operational eﬃ  ciency and help ensure the 
success of forest enterprises. In addition, forest 
planning helps to ensure a more eﬃ  cient wood supply 
chain for products including bleached Eucalyptus 
pulp, capable of adapting to the adverse conditions 
of the macroeconomic environment while reducing 
unnecessary risks during production. 
In a forest planning context, the allocation of 
resource and management activities over time, to 
achieve a speciﬁ c goal (environmental, ﬁ nancial, 
volumetric), is possibly the largest problem in 
forest optimization (Kaya et al., 2016).  Several 
studies have solved forest allocation problems, 
such as transportation planning (Frisk et al., 2010), 
harvest area selection and wood allocation to mills 
(Ouhimmou et al., 2015), optimal allocation of 
woodchips from forest residues to terminals and 
power plants (Marques et al., 2018), and optimal 
allocation of woodchips and logs from thinning and 
clearcuts (Sosa et al., 2015).  Despite these several 
forest resources allocation studies, there is a lack of 
studies that address the allocation of forest outgrower 
scheme areas for wood supplies. There are also 
few studies considering resource optimization with 
outgrower schemes in Brazil as observed in Rode et 
al., (2014) and Rode et al., (2016). This work intents 
to provide a proactive proposal for the allocation of 
outgrower schemes, in which the company seeks out 
rural producers in the most economically attractive 
regions for forest production. 
The objective of the study was to determine 
the most eﬀ ective allocation of areas where the 
outgrower scheme can be implemented including the 
production cost for an Eucalyptus pulp company. The 
optimal allocation of these areas is essential to ensure 
the company's competitiveness in the world pulp 
market in the face of the current economic crisis in 
Brazil and possible climatic changes. Finally, based 
on a sensitivity analysis, we generated thematic 
maps for contract negotiation that included diﬀ erent 
transportation systems. 
Wood supply optimization in brazilian pulp...
Revista Árvore 2019;43(5):e430504
3
2.MATERIAL AND METHODS
2.1Study area and distribution of the forest 
outgrower scheme
The study was conducted in the former Fibria 
(now Suzano SA), in the Aracruz production unit. 
This area is distributed across the Brazilian states 
of Espírito Santo, southern Bahia, and northeastern 
Minas Gerais, encompassing 117 regions (Figure 1) 
covering 583,255 ha with rural properties appropriate 
for forest implantation. Each region is the aggregation 
of sites with similar characteristics such as forest 
production and operational costs (e.g. planting and 
maintenance, harvest, and transportation).
Today the company has contracts in regions 
that are not ﬁ nancially viable that were implemented 
without strategic planning, which increases the 
risk of the business. The focus now is to move new 
contracts to other regions considering the existing 
road network, transportation distance, topography, 
level of mechanization, degree of utilization, expected 
productivity, and proximity to forest stands belonging 
to Fibria. The selected contract modality by Fibria 
was the forest outgrower scheme to increase wood 
production and help regulate the wood supply to the 
mill. This contract modality is widely used to create 
social beneﬁ ts and revenue distribution, because 
companies provide extra income for small and medium-
sized farmers. Fibria’s strategy of establishing new 
outgrower contracts was planned for the years 2016 
to 2021, with wood production expected from 2022 
to 2027. Potential regions to establish new outgrower 
contracts are those within Aracruz production unit.
2.2Mathematical modeling
A mathematical model was developed to 
determine the amount of area in each region in which 
to establish the outgrower schemes while reducing the 
cost of wood production and considering target wood 
production levels from a 6-year tactical planning 
level. Restrictions to represent the maximum storage 
capacity (m³) of wood by warehouse were also 
included in the problem formulation.
The objective function (Eq. 1) is set to minimize 
the total wood production cost (Z) of achieving the 
target production level where; Xijk is the area (ha) to 
be contracted to outgrowers in region i during year j, 
using the transportation system k after harvest, and Cijk 
is the wood production cost (USD/ha) by contracting 
outgrowers in region i, during contract establishment 
year j, using the transportation system k. Costs were 
discounted to year zero (2016) considering an annual 
interest rate of 8%. I is the total number of regions, J is 
the total number of years in the tactical planning period 
(6 years), and K is the total number of transportation 
systems. 
                         
                                                                         
Planting and maintenance costs considered 
fertilizers, 
herbicides, 
ant 
control, 
seedlings, 
technical assistance, environmental licensing, soil 
analysis, quality control and ﬁ nancial advances to 
the landowners (resources for planting and forest 
management operations) totaling 1,396.11 USD/ha 
per year. State taxes were also included in the total 
cost of wood production; 0.16 USD/m³ in the state 
Figure 1 – Spatial distribution of 117 potential regions, located 
in three Brazilian states: Bahia (BA), Espírito Santo 
(ES) and Minas Gerais (MG). Location of pulp industry, 
maritime port (maritime warehouse) and two railroad 
stations (railroad warehouses)
Figura 1 – Distribuição espacial de 117 regiões potenciais, 
localizadas em três estados brasileiros: Bahia (BA), 
Espírito Santo (ES) e Minas Gerais (MG). Localização 
da indústria de celulose, porto marítimo (depósito 
marítimo) e duas estações ferroviárias (depósitos 
ferroviários).
 (Eq-1)
FERREIRA MA et al.
Revista Árvore 2019;43(5):e430504
4
of Espírito Santo, 0.22 USD/m³ in Minas Gerais, and 
zero in Bahia where these taxes are not collected. The 
cost of purchasing tree grower’s wood was based on 
the value currently paid by Fibria. Transportation cost 
for each region was calculated based on the freight 
table that consider the logistical costs to the company 
(e.g. diesel, loading of wood, highway toll, freight 
cost) estimated for diﬀ erent distance ranges. 
The types of wood transportation systems used 
by the company are described below: A)  Direct 
Road Transport (DRT): Employed truck1 (35 ton) 
or truck2 (48 ton), with the cost calculated based 
on the shortest distance route from the centroid 
of the regions to the mill. Centroids were located 
and distances to mills were calculated using a 
geographic information system. B) Transhipment 
Road Transport (TRT): Applied only to sloping areas 
(above 24º), where the cost is calculated considering 
the transhipment to a warehouse and later transport 
to the mill by  truck1 (35 ton) or truck2 (48 ton). 
The shortest distance route from the centroid of the 
regions to the warehouse and from the warehouse to 
the mills were considered. C) Road and Rail Transport 
1 (RRT1): Reconciled use of highways and railroads, 
where wood is transported ﬁ rst by truck to a railway 
warehouse and then via railroad 1 to the mill. D) 
Road and Rail Transport 2 (RRT2): Reconciled 
use of highways and railroads, where wood is 
transported ﬁ rst by truck to a railway warehouse and 
then via railroad 2 to the mill. E) Road and Maritime 
Transport (RMT): Reconciled use of highways and 
a port, where wood is transported ﬁ rst to a maritime 
warehouse and then via barge to the mill.
Harvesting costs were obtained from company 
estimates based on three terrain slope classes (A, 
B, and C) and ﬁ ve site productivity classes. Terrain 
slope class A are areas with slope between 0° and 24° 
harvested with tracked harvesters and forwarders. 
Class B are areas with sloped from 24° to 35° harvested 
with assisted harvesters and wheeled forwarders, each 
anchored to two trees.  Class C are areas with declivity 
greater than 35° harvested manually with chainsaw and 
winched. The volumetric yield at the time of harvest 
was predicted based on the average site index of the 
regions, supported by forecasts involving growth and 
yields models as well as inferences from specialists 
from various operational sectors of the company. 
Some municipalities in the state of Espírito 
Santo have local laws that prohibit or restrict planting 
eucalyptus. The reasons are particular to each 
municipality, but the general aim of these restrictions 
is associated with maintaining the diversity of 
agricultural and forest plantations. This prevents a 
single crop being predominant in the municipality 
and reduces environmental and economic risks. After 
considering all these restrictions, the net area for 
planting was 326,832 ha in the state of Espírito Santo, 
106,917 ha in the state of Bahia, and 149,506 ha in 
Minas Gerais, which are distributed across the 117 
regions.
The equation set (2) limits the area available for 
planting (Aim) corresponding to the net area (ha) by 
slope classiﬁ cation (m = 1: ﬂ at area, m = 2: sloping 
area) in each region i, during period j, independent of 
the transportation system k adopted. 
                                                                          
The formulation also included restrictions for future 
wood demand (Eqs. 3-4), in which Minas Gerais and 
Espírito Santo (Eq. 3) were separated from the state of 
Bahia (Eq. 4) because production cost in this latter state is 
more expensive, but necessary for the regulation purposes. 
The maritime transportation system is located in the Bahia 
state and transports wood to the factory in the Espírito 
Santo state. This transportation system needs to be used for 
security reasons. The goal is to reduce the ﬂ ow of trucks on 
the highway connecting the two states.
In these equations, vijk correspond to the estimated 
future productivity (m³.ha-1) in region i, during year j, 
and transported by the k system. Vmg (Minas Gerais), Ves 
(Espírito Santo) and Vbahia (Bahia) are the future volumetric 
demand for wood after the contracting years j. 
                                                                             
                                                                          
Maximum wood storage for the RRT1, RRT2 and 
RMT transportation systems were also formulated 
using Eq 5, which considered an annual capacity 
of 300,000 m³, 200,000 m³ and 2,300,000 m³, 
respectively.
 (Eq-2)
 (Eq-3)
 (Eq-4)
Wood supply optimization in brazilian pulp...
Revista Árvore 2019;43(5):e430504
5
                                                                             
where, Ld is the maximum storage capacity of the 
warehouses D, with D ={RRT1, RRT2 and RMT} in 
year j.
To guarantee the needed technical assistance to 
tree growers and to avoid exceeding the maximum 
capacity of service with the available labor, the amount 
of area contracted to outgrowers is limited each 
year (Eq.6) where CMij is the maximum contracting 
capacity (ha) per year j in region i.
                                                                           
After deﬁ ning the mathematical model, six 
scenarios were established. Scenario 1 was the 
baseline scenario which only allowed establishing 
outgrower contacts in the states of Minas Gerais 
and Espírito Santo because of the lower wood 
production costs (Eqs. 1 and 3). Scenario 2 evaluated 
which regions are attractive to establish contracts 
restricting the contracting capacity to regions in 
compliance with environmental and organic laws 
(Eqs. 1, 2 and 3). Scenario 3 was similar to Scenario 
2 but only considered the state of Bahia (Eqs. 1, 2 
and 4). Scenario 4 evaluated the impact of the RMT 
transportation system on the total wood production 
cost (Eqs. 1, 2, 4 and 5 where D = {RMT}). Scenario 
5 evaluated the impact of the RRT1, RRT2 and RMT 
systems on the total wood production cost (Eqs. 1, 
2, 4 and 5 where D = {RRT1, RRT2 and RMT}). 
Finally, Scenario 6 evaluated how the constraint 
of technical assistance inﬂ uenced the cost of wood 
production (Eqs. 1, 2, 4, 5 where D= {RRT1, RRT2 
and RMT} and 6). 
The formulations representing the six scenarios 
were run and solved using the Lindo software 15.0 
academic version on a personal desktop computer 
with an Intel® Core TM i-5-5200U CPU 2.20 GHz 
processor and 8 GB of RAM.  Scenario solutions 
were compared based on the objective function 
value (wood production cost UDS/m3) as well as the 
average transportation distance from each region to 
the destination.
The scenario closest to the company’s long-
term planning, which includes meeting volumetric 
goals and the largest number of restrictions, due 
to implementation feasibility, was selected as the 
best scenario. For this best scenario, a sensitivity 
analysis was conducted using the concept of reduced 
cost, which are widely used for economic decision-
making in many areas of study. The reduced cost 
of a variable can be interpreted as the amount the 
objective function coeﬃ  cient of the variable must 
improve before the variable enters the solution. 
This interpretation was presented in a study by 
Mohammadi et al. (2016) with a case for planting 
forest species. For the present study, this concept 
quantiﬁ es the intensity of the improvement in the cost 
to purchase tree grower’s wood in each region taking 
into account the associated transportation system, so 
that it can be viable for the outgrower scheme. A 
map of wood purchase cost reduction per region was 
generated to understand the spatial relationships, 
transportation systems and productivity in the wood 
supply. The percentage reduction rate (tx) was 
calculated using equation (7), where cijk is the total 
wood production cost in region i, during contracting 
year j, using the transportation system k for wood 
after harvest; and rdcijk indicates the reduced cost of 
the respective decision variable Xijk. 
                                                                              
3.RESULTS
3.1 Behavior of the economic scenarios and the cost 
of wood
The mean solution time among the six scenarios 
was 0.5 s. The nature of the continuous decision 
variable generated a gain in processing time via the 
simplex algorithm by the solver. This rapid solution 
time shows the ﬂ exibility of the model, which can be 
used by companies to eﬃ  ciently create and evaluate 
diﬀ erent scenarios for decision-making.
The total wood production cost over the 6-year 
planning horizon was the smallest for Scenario 1 (32.43 
USD/m3) and increased almost constantly (to 41.56 
USD/m3) for the remaining scenarios (Table 1). Scenario 
1 did not consider the constraint of the eﬀ ective area 
of planting by region nor the limitations in the use 
of transportation systems, only the requisite of wood 
to supply the mill. The type of transportation system 
had an inﬂ uence on the total cost of wood because 
the road system presented the lowest cost, due to the 
smaller average radius of displacement of 45 km, 
 (Eq-5)
 (Eq-6)
 (Eq-7)
FERREIRA MA et al.
Revista Árvore 2019;43(5):e430504
6
compared to 163 km of multimodal radius in Scenario 
6 (Table 1). As a result, the share of transportation costs 
increased from 14% for Scenario 1 to 31% for Scenario 
6 (Table 1).
When constraints to limit the planting area 
per region were introduced in Scenario 2, a larger 
number of regions were selected for planting, 29 
regions (Table 1). Consequently, there was an 11 
% increase in the outgrower scheme area from 
63,270 to 70,509 ha, and a 12% increase in the cost 
of wood from 32.43 to 36.53 USD/m³ (Table 1). 
We also highlighted the variation of transportation 
cost between Scenario 1 and Scenario 2, from 14% 
to 21%. As expected, Scenario 2 and 3 showed 
similar results. The introduction of state of Bahia 
on the model produced an additional increase of 
only 1% (70,509 to 71,535 ha) for the outgrower 
scheme area and 3% (36.35 to 37.28 USD/m³) 
for the cost of wood (Table 1). The increase in 
transportation cost was 2% (from 21 to 23%), 
which is acceptable because the areas available 
for planting in the state of Bahia are further away 
from the factory.
The other scenarios activated other transportation 
systems  at some point during the 6-year planning. 
The activation of the RMT system in Scenario 4 was 
required to meet the demand from regions located in 
the state of Bahia and near the maritime warehouse. 
This increased the cost of wood production by 7% 
(37.28 to 39.95 USD/m³) (Table 1), with transportation 
costs accounting for 5% (23% to 28%) of this increase. 
The average cost of wood production and the average 
distance followed the same trend observed because 
they present a high correlation.
The activation of all transportation systems 
in Scenario 5 caused an additional increase in the 
cost of wood of 4% (39.95 to 41.48 USD/m³), with 
transportation costs accounting for 3% (28% to 31%) 
of this increase. Scenario 6 resulted in a slight increase 
in the cost of wood by 0.2% (41.48 to 41.56 USD/m³). 
Although providing the largest cost, Scenario 6 showed 
better operational feasibility because 24 regions with 
diversiﬁ ed wood transport were activated; the DRT, 
RRT1, RRT2 and RMT systems. 
  
 
Spatial aspects* 
 
    
Economic aspects
 Scenario 
OSA 
NZ 
AD
  
(ha) 
(km) 
 
 Total cost of wood 
 
Cost of wood by activity
  
 
 
 
Thousand USD 
USD/m³ 
Harvest 
Transportation 
Others
 
1 
63,270 
1 
45 
235,689 
32.43 
26% 
14% 
61%
 
2 
70,509 
29 
111 
262,447 
36.35 
24% 
21% 
55%
 
3 
71,535 
20 
142 
270,018 
37.28 
24% 
23% 
53%
 
4 
69,390 
21 
160 
290,075 
39.95 
22% 
28% 
50%
 
5 
67,318 
22 
161 
301,053 
41.48 
21% 
31% 
48%
 
6 
67,395 
24 
163 
302,008 
41.56 
21% 
31% 
48%
Table 1 – Spatial and economic aspects for the six scenarios available.
Tabela 1 – Aspectos espaciais e econômicos para os seis cenários disponíveis.
 *OSA: Outgrower scheme area; NZ: Number of regions; AD: Average distance  
*OSA: área de fomento ﬂ orestal; NZ: número de regiões; AD: distância média.
Reduction in the total wood purchase cost (%)
 Region 
 
 Transport system type
Number
  
DRT 
TRT 
RRT1 
RRT2 
RMT
 
2 
 
18 
- 
- 
- 5
 36 
18 
94 
9 
- 
-
 46 
3 
49 
- 
- 
-
 114 
60 
149 
- 
- 
-
Table 2 – Reduction in the wood purchase cost that allows the 
activation of new regions under Scenario 6. 
Tabela 2 –  Redução no custo de compra da madeira que permite 
a ativação de novas regiões no cenário 6.
Figure 2 – Maps with activated and potential regions, and their 
respective reduction rates in the wood purchase cost 
(Scenario 6).
Figura 2 – Mapa com regiões ativadas e potenciais, e suas 
respectivas taxas de redução no custo de compra da 
madeira. 
Wood supply optimization in brazilian pulp...
Revista Árvore 2019;43(5):e430504
7
3.2 Analysis of sensitivity and variation in the wood 
purchase cost
An alternative to increasing the number of 
regions in which to establish outgrower schemes is 
to reduce the associated wood purchase cost.  When 
considering the most realistic scenario 6, we can see 
the existence of potential regions for the outgrower 
scheme (Table 2). The potential regions to be 
activated indicate a minimum reduction in the wood 
purchase cost, while for the non-potential regions, the 
reduction rate reaches unviable values close to 100%. 
This change in cost still allows changes in the types of 
active transportation systems . 
Considering scenario 6, Figure 2 shows the 
relationship between the reduction rates in the wood 
purchase cost in the diﬀ erent regions by transport 
system adopted.
The forecast for initiating/renewing outgrower 
contracts based on the experiences of technicians 
(empirical scenario) for the ﬁ rst year was compared 
with the forecast generated by the model in Scenario 
6 (Table 3). In the empirical scenario, there are 48 
regions activated. This large number of regions hinders 
the company’s eﬃ  ciency directly reﬂ ected by the 
increase in the radius of operation from 163 km to 205 
km. The empirical scenario hinders the allocation of 
teams during the initiating/renewing of the outgrower 
scheme also aﬀ ecting the logistics of providing 
technical assistance. By contrast, scenario 6 allows 
for a more feasible implementation by concentrating 
contracts on only 24 regions. The spatial distribution of 
the regions was concentrated around the mill, forming 
homogeneous blocks to initiate/renew outgrower 
contracts, which also reduced wood production cost 
by 9.2% and the average transportation displacement 
by 56 km (Table 3). 
4. DISCUSSION
4.1Cost of wood and transportation systems 
Compared with Scenario 1, Scenarios 2 and 3 
showed a larger number of regions for initiating/
renewing the outgrower contracts selecting the DRT 
system for the transportation of wood to the mill 
(Table 1). This demonstrated the greater economic 
attractiveness of the DRT (Road) compared with 
RRT (Rail) and RMT (Maritime). By contrast, recent 
studies on maritime transportation indicate a highly 
competitive position of this transport modality 
compared with other transportation systems . On 
average in Brazil, freight is 40% cheaper than road 
transportation for similar distances (Nascimento, 
2012). Our results were contradictory due to the high 
ﬁ xed (structural) cost of the RMT system, which is 
responsible for the high cost of this transport system 
compared to the DRT system. The competitiveness 
of this transport system could be facilitated by the 
expansion of the number of barges and an increase in 
the volume of wood, which would dilute the ﬁ xed cost 
and consequently reducing the transportation cost per 
m³. Also, the maritime system has other advantages 
when compared to the road system such as reduced 
pollution, greater safety and load capacity (Caxito, 
2011).
To make the RRT1 and RRT2 systems 
economically viable, a 23% reduction in the wood 
cost would be required, and for the RMT the reduction 
is even higher at 36% considering Scenario 3. Rail 
transport is the second-most utilized system in the ﬂ ow 
of cargo transported in Brazil, while road transport 
accounts for more than 50% (Alves et al., 2013). 
According to Machado et al. (2009), in Brazil, forest 
transportation is mainly carried out by the road system 
due to history and national trends. Other contributing 
factors are the extensive road network, the availability 
of diﬀ erent types of vehicles and a low installation 
value when compared to other existing transportation 
systems . 
Results show a direct relationship between 
average transportation distance and wood cost 
(Table 1), which is expected because larger distances 
cause higher transportation costs (Ghaﬀ ariyan et 
Scenario 
Total cost 
Cost 
Cost of 
Mean
 
 
(USD) 
reduction 
wood 
distance
 
 
 
(%) 
USD/$.m-3) 
(km)
Empirical 
138,972,844 
- 
44.44 
205
 
1 
101,415,759 
-27.0 
32.43 
45
 
2 
103,123,283 
-25.8 
32.98 
62
 
3 
110,542,822 
-20.5 
35.35 
111
 
4 
119,096,281 
-14.3 
38.09 
131
 
5 
124,704,421 
-10.3 
39.88 
140
 
6 
126,163,989 
-9.2 
40.35 
149
Table 3 – Summary of comparison between the tactical planning 
scenarios for initiating/renewing the outgrower scheme 
and that predicted by the company in the only ﬁ rst year.
Tabela 3 – Resumo da comparação entre os cenários do 
planejamento tático para contratar/renovar fomentos 
ﬂ orestais e aquele previsto pela empresa somente para 
o primeiro ano.
FERREIRA MA et al.
Revista Árvore 2019;43(5):e430504
8
al., 2013). According to Börjesson and Gustavsson 
(1996), truck transportation is more eﬃ  cient for 
relatively shorter distances, and trains and barges 
are more eﬃ  cient for longer distances. Therefore, 
the transportation cost could be reduced for longer 
distances if a change from road to rail or waterway is 
conducted (Börjesson and Gustavsson, 1996). In the 
analyzed scenarios, transportation cost reached 31% 
of the total cost, which is relatively high for a single 
operation (Table 1). This large cost share conﬁ rms the 
importance of analyzing and planning the operational 
alternatives in the transport of wood. 
The strategies for initiating forestry outgrower 
schemes are essential to guarantee the wood supply 
to the pulp mills in Brazil. Studies indicate that the 
economic returns of tree grower projects are higher 
than those from commercial plantations carried 
out exclusively by the forestry company (Rode et 
al., 2015; Rode et al., 2016). Rezende et al. (2006) 
and Rode et al. (2015) simulated diﬀ erent scenarios 
by testing the feasibility of forest plantations and 
conﬁ rmed that the purchase of standing timber was 
more attractive when compared to other forms of wood 
procurement because of the reduction in the cost of 
wood production, which validates the logic of timber 
purchase in the present study. We have highlighted 
the importance of evaluating several scenarios for 
decision making at large-scale companies, such as the 
one considered in the present study. 
4.2 Reduced cost
The reduction rates proposed in Table 2 are 
drivers for investment in operational development to 
increase the eﬃ  ciency in the indicated regions. The 
expansion of the transportation capacity and planting 
mechanization are some examples of improvements 
by the company. After studying and exhausting the 
possibilities of operational improvements, the second 
alternative would be to negotiate wood purchase cost 
with suppliers and tree growers. 
Four regions with contracting potential can be 
activated and introduced into the result if there is a 
reduction in the wood purchase cost. This reduction 
could be achieved by negotiating for lower tariﬀ s 
with suppliers or to increase transportation capacity. 
For example, Region 2 requires a reduction of only 
5% in the cost of wood to be activated via the RMT 
system. This reduction can be realized with the 
expansion in the number of barges and the consequent 
increase of transported volume and dilution of 
ﬁ xed costs. We have highlighted that 5% reduction 
activates only a particular transport system but may 
become impracticable for another system, even with a 
reduction in the wood purchase cost.
Region 114 is economically infeasible for the 
expansion of the forestry outgrower scheme because 
its areas are distant and inclined. The use of the TRT 
transport system requires a 149% reduction rate in the 
wood purchase cost, and 60% considering the DRT 
system. Working in this type of region with high 
operating costs is not advisable. For the expected 
proﬁ ts to occur, it will be necessary to apply high 
reductions in the amount paid to the tree growers, 
making the business impractical. By contrast, in 
region 2, negotiation between the company and the 
tree grower is viable because if wood purchase is 
reduced by only 5%, considering the RMT system for 
transportation of wood, the region becomes attractive 
to the company. By contrast, in region 46, a 3% 
reduction in the price of wood is required because this 
region has a ﬂ at area and is closer to the mill. The 
distance is only 128 km, that is, 35 km less than the 
average transport distance of Scenario 6. According 
to Rode et al. (2014), the outgrower net present value 
for Eucalyptus forests in the state of Minas Gerais 
depends on the incentives, wood price, distance and 
production, which corroborates our results. 
By analyzing the TRT transport map, we conﬁ rm 
that it is the least suitable for transporting wood 
(Figure 2). The activation of regions using this system 
requires a reduction of more than 50% in the wood 
purchase cost. Nonetheless, due to the greater range 
in the use of the DRT system and the ease of roads 
connecting mill and rural producer, this presents clear 
regions of well-deﬁ ned prices. The RMT system only 
occurs in the northern region of the area available for 
the outgrower scheme but it is restricted to a small 
number of regions.
5.CONCLUSIONS
In Brazilian pulp companies, wood originated 
from partnerships with rural producers represents a 
large part of the industrial supply. In this study, with 
the use of a single optimization model and activating 
diﬀ erent constraints, it was possible to evaluate 
Wood supply optimization in brazilian pulp...
Revista Árvore 2019;43(5):e430504
9
scenarios for the allocation of Eucalyptus stands with 
the outgrower scheme in economically eﬃ  cient areas. 
In addition, we developed thematic maps for the 
negotiation of new contracts that included diﬀ erent 
transportation systems. We highlight the importance 
of developing this model due to two main factors that 
make complex this allocation problem of outgrower 
scheme. The ﬁ rst factor is the extensive area available 
for Eucalyptus cultivation, in three Brazilian states 
with diﬀ erent governmental laws, operational costs 
and productivities. Secondly, the possibility of using 
three of wood transportation systems. In summary, the 
use a decision support system in this work is relevant 
for improving the eﬃ  ciency of forest planning and 
helping to ensure the success of partnerships.
Six scenarios were solved to simulate strategies 
of allocation of outgrower schemes according to 
the operational possibilities existing in the area of 
study. From Scenario 1 to 6, new constrains and 
transportation systems were added with the goal of 
understanding the impact of each scenario on the total 
wood production cost. As expected, wood production 
cost was smallest for Scenario 1 (32.43 USD/m3) and 
increased almost constantly (to 41.56 USD/m3) for the 
remaining Scenarios from 2 to 6. The activation of all 
transportation systems occurred under Scenario 5. In 
Scenario 6, 24 regions and 4 transportation systems 
(DRT, RRT1, RRT2 and RMT) were activated. The 
beneﬁ t of the formulated model was the very quick 
solution time, because it can help with eﬃ  ciently 
evaluating diﬀ erent alternative to facilitate decision 
making. 
The developed model allows the company to 
update its forest expansion strategies periodically, 
according to variations in factors such as the demand 
for wood, variation in operating costs, availability 
of new areas, and changes in municipal laws. 
Furthermore, mitigation of contract breach becomes 
more likely since decisions are made based on an 
optimization model and no longer empirically.
Brieﬂ y, among several applications of this model 
for the company, we can highlight the possibility 
of use for the allocation of lease agreements (land 
leasing), another form of partnership existing in 
the company. Additionally, the development of a 
stochastic model that considers the uncertainties 
of input variables of the model to support decision 
making under risk conditions was identiﬁ ed as a 
good approach for future work on the allocation 
outgrower schemes.
6.REFERENCES 
Alves RT, Fiedler NC, Silva EN, Lopes ES, Carmo 
FCA. Análise técnica e de custos do transporte de 
madeira com diferentes composições veículares. 
Revista Árvore. 2013;37(5):897-904.
Berger R, Timofeiczyk Junior R, Carnieri C, 
Lacowicz PG, Sawinski Junior J, Brasil AA. 
Minimização de custos de transporte florestal com a 
utilização da programação linear. Revista Floresta. 
2003;33(1):53-62.
Börjesson P, Gustavsson L. Regional production 
and utilization of biomass in Sweden. Energy. 
1996;21(9):747-764.
Caxito F. Logística: um enfoque prático. Second. São 
Paulo: Saraiva; 2011. 
Fibria celulose. [acessado em: 01 de fev. de 2016]. 
Disponível em: http://www.fibria.com.br/quem-somos/ 
Fischer A, Zylbersztajn D. O fomento florestal 
como alternativa de suprimento de matéria-prima na 
indústria brasileira de celulose. Revista Eletrônica de 
Administração. 2012;18(2):494-520.
Frisk M, Göthe-Lundgren M, Jörnsten K, 
Rönnqvist M. Cost allocation in collaborative forest 
transportation. European Journal of Operational 
Research. 2010;205(2):448-458.
Ghaffariyan MR, Acuna M, Brown M. Analysing the 
effect of five operational factors on forest residue 
supply chain costs: a case study in Western Australia. 
Biomass and Bioenergy. 2013;59:486-493.
Kaya A, Bettinger P, Boston K, Akbulut R, Ucar Z, 
Siry J, et al. Optimisation in Forest Management. 
Current Forestry Reports. 2016;2(1):1-17.
Machado CC, Lopes ES, Birro MH. Elementos básicos 
do transporte florestal rodoviário. Viçosa: UFV; 2009. v.2
Marques A, Rasinmäki J, Soares R, Amorim P. Planning 
woody biomass supply in hot systems under variable 
chips energy content. Biomass and Bioenergy. 
2018;108:265-277.
FERREIRA MA et al.
Revista Árvore 2019;43(5):e430504
10
Mohammadi Z, Limaei SM, Shahraji, TR. Linear 
programming approach for optimal forest plantation. 
Journal of Forest Research. 2016;28(2):1-9.
Nascimento MV. Proteção e liberalização no 
transporte marítimo de cabotagem: o uso da 
regulação nos mercados canadense e brasileiro. 
Journal of Transport Literature. 2012;6(4):228-234.
Oliveira PRS, Valverde SR, Coelho FMG. Aspectos 
de relevância econômica no fomento florestal a 
partir da percepção dos produtores rurais envolvidos. 
Revista Árvore. 2006;30(4):593-602.
Ouhimmou M, Haddad S, Boukherroub T. Decision 
support system for selection of harvest areas and 
wood allocation to mills. IFAC-PapersOnLine. 
2015;48(3):628-633.
Rezende JLP, Padua CTJ, Oliveira AD, Scolforo 
JRS. Análise econômica de fomento florestal com 
eucalipto no Estado de Minas Gerais. Revista Cerne. 
2006;12(3):221-231.
Rode R, Leite, HG, Silva ML, Ribeiro CAAS, Binoti 
DHB. The economics and optimal management regimes of 
eucalyptus plantations: a case study of forestry outgrower 
schemes in Brazil. Forest Policy and Economics. 
2014;44:26-33.
Rode R, Leite HG, Oliveira MLR, Binoti DHB, Ribeiro 
CAAS, Souza AL, et al. Comparação da regulação 
florestal de projetos de fomento com áreas próprias 
de empresas florestais. Pesquisa Florestal Brasileira. 
2015;35(81):11-19.
Rode R, Leite HG, Binoti DHB, Ribeiro CAAS, Souza 
AL, Cosenza DN, et al. Applying  classical forest 
regulation methods to smallholdings with cooperative 
constraints. Revista Cerne. 2016;22(2):197-206.
Silva FL, Griffith JJ, Jacovine LAG, Valadares JH, 
Fernandes MAS, Silva ECG. Estudo da relação de 
confiança em programa de fomento florestal de indústria 
de celulose na visão dos produtores rurais. Revista Árvore. 
2009;33(4):723-732.
Sosa A, Acuna M, McDonnell K, Devlin G. Managing 
the moisture content of wood biomass for the 
optimisation of Ireland’s transport supply strategy to 
bioenergy markets and competing industries. Energy. 
2015;86:354-368.
