May 2016 v Volume 7(5) v Article e01280
1
 v www.esajournals.org
Biocontrol insect impacts population growth of its  
target plant species but not an incidentally used nontarget
Haley A. Catton,1,† Robert G. Lalonde,1  
Yvonne M. Buckley,2 and Rosemarie A. De ­Clerck-Floate3
1Department of Biology, University of British Columbia Okanagan, Kelowna, British Columbia V1V 1V7 Canada
2School of Natural Sciences, Zoology, Trinity College Dublin, The University of Dublin, Dublin 2 Ireland
3Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Lethbridge Research Centre, Lethbridge, Alberta T1J 4B1 Canada
Citation: Catton, H. A., R. G. Lalonde, Y. M. Buckley, and R. A. De Clerck-Floate. 2016. Biocontrol insect impacts 
population growth of its target plant species but not an incidentally used nontarget. Ecosphere 7(5):e01280. 10.1002/
ecs2.1280
Abstract.   Understanding the impact of herbivory on plant populations is a fundamental goal of ecology. 
Damage to individual plants can be visually striking and affect the fates of individuals, but these impacts 
do not necessarily translate into population-­level differences in vital rates (survival, growth, or fecundity) 
or population growth rates. In biological control of weeds, quantitative assessments of population-­level 
impacts of released agents on both target invasive plants and native, nontarget plants are needed to inform 
evaluations of the benefits and risks of releasing agents into new regions. Here we present a 3-­yr exper-
imental demographic field study using the European root-­feeding biocontrol weevil, Mogulones crucifer, 
first released in Canada in 1997 to control the invasive weed Cynoglossum officinale (Boraginaceae). Mogu-
lones crucifer is an effective “search and destroy” agent in Canada, but sporadically feeds, oviposits, and 
develops on native nontarget Boraginaceae. We investigated the population-­level impacts of this biocon-
trol insect on its target weed and a native nontarget plant, Hackelia micrantha (Boraginaceae), by releasing 
large numbers of weevils into naturally occurring patches of H. micrantha growing isolated from or inter-
spersed with C. officinale. We followed the fates of individual plants on release and nonrelease (control) 
sites for two transition years, developed matrix models to project population growth rates (λ) for each 
plant species, and examined the contributions from differences in vital rates to changes in λ using life table 
response experiments (LTRE). In contrast to studies of the insect–plant interaction in its native range, as a 
biocontrol agent, M. crucifer increased mortality of C. officinale rosettes in the year immediately following 
release, depressing the weed's λ to below the population replacement level. However, λ for H. micrantha 
was never depressed below the replacement level, and any differences between release and nonrelease 
sites in the nontarget could not be explained by significant contributions from vital rates in the LTRE. This 
study is the first to simultaneously and experimentally examine target and nontarget population-­level im-
pacts of a weed biocontrol insect in the field, and supports the theoretical prediction that plant life history 
characteristics and uneven herbivore host preferences can interact to produce differences in population-­
level impacts between target and nontarget plant species.
Key words:   biocontrol; Cynoglossum officinale; Hackelia micrantha; herbivory; houndstongue; life table response 
­experiment; matrix population models; Mogulones crucifer; Mogulones cruciger; nontarget impacts; target impacts;  
weed biocontrol. 
Received 7 August 2015; revised 9 October 2015; accepted 27 October 2015. Corresponding Editor: K. Haynes.
† E-mail: haley.catton@alumni.ubc.ca 
Copyright: © 2016 Catton et al. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons ­Attribution 
­License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is ­properly cited.
May 2016 v Volume 7(5) v Article e01280
2
 v www.esajournals.org
CATTON ET AL.
Introduction
Insect herbivores can have enormous influence 
on plant populations (Huntly 1991, Agrawal et al. 
2012, Kim et al. 2013), however, the link between 
herbivory damage and plant population dynam-
ics is complex, poorly understood, and difficult to 
predict (Crawley 1989, Halpern and Underwood 
2006, Maron and Crone 2006). The occurrence of 
herbivory does not necessarily affect plant per-
formance (Trumble et al. 1993), but when it does, 
impacts can be considered at the individual and 
population levels. First, impact on an individual 
plant’s performance occurs when insect damage 
causes it to die or depresses its growth or repro-
duction. Second, individual impacts can collec-
tively translate into herbivore-­driven changes in 
plant abundance (i.e., population-­level impacts) 
provided that (1) individual impacts are severe 
and widespread enough to affect demograph-
ic vital rates (survival, growth, reproduction) at 
the population scale, and (2) population growth 
rate (λ) is sensitive to changes in affected vital 
rates (Ehrlén et al. 2005). Depending on a plant’s 
life history characteristics, λ will be differential-
ly sensitive to changes in vital rates of various 
plant life stages (Franco and Silvertown 2004). 
For example, λ for short-­lived plants tends to be 
vulnerable to changes in growth and reproduc-
tion, while λ of long-­lived, iteroparous plants is 
generally responsive to mortality of established 
individuals (Silvertown et al. 1993, Lesica 1995). 
Characterizing and understanding changes in vi-
tal rates can be accomplished through collecting 
simple plant performance data, but predicting 
changes in λ requires knowledge and integration 
of a plant’s complete life history into population 
growth models (Ehrlén 2003, Ehrlén et al. 2005).
Understanding and predicting the connection 
between herbivory impacts to individual plants 
and consequent reductions in plant abundance is 
directly relevant to classical biological control of 
invasive plants (henceforth referred to as ‘weed 
biocontrol’). The goal of this applied ecological 
discipline is to use host-­specific insect herbivores 
to sustainably suppress invasive plant popula-
tions to below ecologically and/or economically 
relevant threshold levels (McFadyen 1998, Hod-
dle 2004, Suckling 2013). However, quantitative 
evidence for the magnitudes and mechanisms of 
impact by released agents on their target weeds 
is scarce (Carson et al. 2008, Morin et al. 2009). 
Many postrelease impact studies have been 
observational and uncontrolled, where plants 
near releases were monitored without equiv-
alent attention to control areas without agents 
(e.g., Hoffmann and Moran 1998, Grevstad 2006, 
Seastedt et al. 2007). Even for those impact stud-
ies that have involved controlled and replicated 
manipulation of insect density, posttreatment 
data collection has often been restricted to indi-
vidual plant performance (e.g., Sheppard et  al. 
2001, Corn et al. 2006), or to phenomenological 
differences in plant density or cover (e.g., Butler 
et al. 2006, De Clerck-­Floate and Wikeem 2009) 
without linking the changes in plant abundance 
to underlying vital rate driver. Experimental 
studies that measure aspects of both target weed 
performance and density come closer to uncov-
ering mechanisms behind population-­level im-
pacts of agent exposure (e.g., Dhileepan 2001, 
Seastedt et al. 2003, Tipping et al. 2009) or lack of 
impacts (Garren and Strauss 2009, Ortega et al. 
2012), but rarely empirically determine how ob-
served changes in vital rates explain responses 
in plant population growth rate through popu-
lation modeling. Experimental demography and 
population modeling reveal how vital rates affect 
population growth rate and combined with bio-
logical knowledge of a system, can uncover the 
mechanisms by which an agent affects (or fails to 
affect) plant populations (Kriticos 2003). To our 
knowledge, the only postrelease field-­based ex-
perimental demographic study of an introduced 
specialist biocontrol insect on its invasive target 
weed is that by Dauer et al. (2012) on the Jacobaea 
vulgaris L. [=Senecio jacobaea L.] system.
Understanding the impact of released biocon-
trol agents at the plant population level is useful 
for assessing risks to nontarget species. Insects 
given regulatory approval for release in countries 
practicing classical weed biocontrol can often use 
nontarget plants phylogenetically related to their 
target weed host to some degree (Sheppard et al. 
2005), particularly when the insects are at high 
densities (e.g., Baker et al. 2004, Dhileepan et al. 
2006, Pratt et al. 2009). While minor feeding on 
individual plants of nontarget species classified 
as threatened or endangered (also known as 
‘at risk’) may be legally relevant in some coun-
tries (Sheppard et al. 2003), ecological relevance 
occurs at the plant population level (Delfosse 
 21508925, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ecs2.1280 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
May 2016 v Volume 7(5) v Article e01280
3
 v www.esajournals.org
CATTON ET AL.
2005, Suckling and Sforza 2014). In that regard, 
the suite of observational demographic studies 
showing population-­level impact on native non-
target thistles from the seed-­feeding biocontrol 
weevils Rhinocyllus conicus Frölich and Larinus 
planus Fabricius (Louda et al. 1997, 2005, Louda 
and O’Brien 2002, Rose et al. 2005, Havens et al. 
2012) have been highly influential and set a new 
standard for future nontarget studies. However, 
we know of no experimental demographic stud-
ies involving biocontrol agents and nontarget 
plants.
We conducted a 3-­yr manipulative factorial 
field experiment to assess herbivory impacts of a 
root-­feeding biocontrol weevil Mogulones crucifer 
Pallas (=Ceutorhynchus cruciger Herbst, =Mogu-
lones cruciger Herbst, Coleoptera:Curculionidae), 
on its target invasive host plant Cynoglossum offi-
cinale L. (Boraginaceae), and a native, nontarget 
host plant, Hackelia micrantha (Eastw.) J.L. Gentry 
(Boraginaceae). We released M. crucifer into nat-
urally occurring patches of the nontarget plant 
in Canada growing interspersed or isolated from 
the target weed and compared the demographic 
response of target and nontarget plants on re-
lease sites to those on nonrelease (control) sites 
for two transition years after release. Herbivory 
patterns documented in this experiment indicat-
ed that M. crucifer fed on both plant species, but 
relative to the target weed, H. micrantha herbivo-
ry was localized (Catton et al. 2014), temporary, 
rare, mild, and driven by a spillover mechanism 
(Catton et al. 2015). Catton et al. (2015) therefore 
predicted that population-­level impacts were 
unlikely for the nontarget plant, but noted that 
quantitative demographic investigation was 
needed. Theory predicts that the difference in 
relative preference of a biocontrol agent for its 
target and nontarget hosts may not translate into 
proportional impacts if the nontarget species is 
especially vulnerable (or robust) to the herbivory 
experienced (Holt and Hochberg 2001). Here, we 
use demographic data and population modeling 
to address these follow-­up questions regarding 
target and nontarget impacts in this experiment. 
Specifically, we address: (1) Did the biocontrol in-
sect cause population-­level impacts to the target 
or nontarget plant, and if so, how? and (2) Did 
population-­level impacts persist after the year of 
release? To our knowledge, this is the first exper-
imental demographic study to simultaneously 
investigate the magnitudes and mechanisms of 
impact of a biocontrol agent on both its target 
weed (C.  officinale) and a co-­occurring native, 
nontarget plant (H. micrantha).
Methods
Study system
The system for the current study has previ-
ously been described (Catton et al. 2014, 2015), 
but relevant information is briefly summarized 
here for our focal species. Cynoglossum officinale 
(houndstongue) is a biennial or short-­lived pe-
rennial Eurasian tap-­rooted forb that has in-
vaded disturbed grassland and forested habitats 
in North America. This weed is problematic 
to the cattle industry, primarily due to its tox-
icity 
and 
fur-­clinging, 
burred 
nutlets 
(Upadhyaya et  al. 1988). Cynoglossum officinale 
seeds germinate in the spring and overwinter 
as vegetative rosettes with taproots (De Jong 
and Klinkhamer 1988a). When a threshold size 
is reached (Wesselingh et  al. 1997), in the sec-
ond or later spring, plants flower (i.e., ‘bolt’) 
and produce adhesive burred nutlets for dis-
persal by epizoochory (De Clerck-­Floate 1997). 
Flowering is usually fatal for C.  officinale, but 
2–45% of flowering C. officinale in the introduced 
range may survive to flower a second time 
(Williams 2009). Cynoglossum officinale repro-
duces by seed only and generally requires 
small-­scale soil disturbances to establish in both 
its native and introduced ranges (Klinkhamer 
and De Jong 1988, Williams et  al. 2010). The 
plant therefore has patchy distributions and 
exhibits metapopulation dynamics in both its 
native and introduced ranges (van der Meijden 
et  al. 1992, DeClerck-­Floate 1996).
The European root-­feeding weevil M. crucifer 
damages C. officinale predominately through lar-
val root-­feeding (Prins et al. 1992), though adults 
feed on leaf blades, petioles, and bolting stems. 
Individual C. officinale plants can commonly con-
tain >20 and occasionally >100  M.  crucifer eggs 
or larvae (De Clerck-­Floate and Schwarzländer 
2002, Van Hezewijk et  al. 2008, Catton et  al. 
2015). The weevil is functionally univoltine but 
can reach outbreak population densities within 
several generations when not limited by C.  of-
ficinale availability (Schwarzlaender 1997, De 
Clerck-­Floate et al. 2005). Mogulones crucifer is an 
 21508925, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ecs2.1280 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
May 2016 v Volume 7(5) v Article e01280
4
 v www.esajournals.org
CATTON ET AL.
­excellent example of a “search and destroy” bio-
control agent (Murdoch et al. 1985). Approved for 
release in Canada in 1997, the weevil has quickly 
suppressed populations of its target weed and 
dispersed to new infestations (De Clerck-­Floate 
et al. 2005, De Clerck-­Floate and Wikeem 2009). 
In some cases on rangeland in the interior of Brit-
ish Columbia, Canada, M. crucifer has eliminated 
local C. officinale within 2 yr after release when 
interacting with drought conditions (De Clerck-­
Floate et al. 2005, De Clerck-­Floate and Wikeem 
2009). In its native range, M.  crucifer is known 
to decrease fecundity of C. officinale by 30–35%, 
but not affect mortality of vegetative rosettes 
(Prins et al. 1992, Williams et al. 2010). However, 
the fecundity impact observed in Europe is not 
sufficient itself to cause decreases in C. officinale 
populations in North America (Maron et al. 2010, 
Williams et al. 2010). In addition to controlling 
C.  officinale in the introduced range, M.  crucifer 
also sporadically feeds, oviposits, and develops 
in native nontarget Boraginaceae species in Can-
ada (De Clerck-­Floate and Schwarzländer 2002, 
Andreas et al. 2008). Nontarget use was expected 
for this oligophagous insect, as pre-­ and post-
release host specificity tests revealed that the 
weevil’s host range included several confamilial 
species, albeit both its preference and perfor-
mance were much stronger for C.  officinale (De 
Clerck-­Floate and Schwarzländer 2002). Notably, 
the demographic consequences of M. crucifer her-
bivory have not been studied at the individual or 
population level for any nontarget species.
Hackelia micrantha (Boraginaceae), commonly 
known as ‘blue stickseed’, is a polycarpic tap-­
rooted perennial forb native to North America. 
Hackelia micrantha grows sympatrically with the 
confamilial, invasive C.  officinale in semiforest-
ed rangeland in British Columbia, Alberta, and 
the western United States (Douglas et al. 1998), 
and is similar to C. officinale in shoot morpholo-
gy and phenology, although is more long-­lived. 
Mogulones crucifer accepts H. micrantha as a field 
host for feeding, oviposition, and larval develop-
ment, but prefers the nontarget species to a lesser 
degree than C. officinale. Field surveys by Catton 
et al. (2015) found 17% of sampled H. micrantha 
were colonized with M.  crucifer eggs or larvae 
compared with 83% of C. officinale, with 39 M. cru-
cifer eggs or larvae in C. officinale for every one in 
H. micrantha. The maximum number of juvenile 
M. crucifer found in a H. micrantha plant was 10, 
compared to 116 for C. officinale. Hackelia micran-
tha supports complete development of M. crucifer 
(R. De Clerck-­Floate and H. Catton, unpublished 
manuscript), but the weevil did not establish on 
release sites in this experiment where C. officina-
le was absent (“Target Rare” sites, see Methods: 
Rangeland release experiment; Catton et al. 2015). 
The global conservation status of H. micrantha is 
abundant and secure (NatureServe 2012).
Rangeland release experiment
A factorial field experiment using M.  crucifer 
releases was conducted from 2009 to 2011 to 
characterize the demography of C. officinale and 
H. micrantha in the presence and absence of the 
biocontrol weevil. In 2008, 12 sites with naturally 
occurring patches of H.  micrantha were located 
within a radius of 7.5  km under aspen Populus 
tremuloides Michx. canopy on grazed rangeland 
in the Foothills Fescue Natural Region in south-
ern Alberta, Canada (Downing and Pettapiece 
2006). Sites were ≥360 m apart and were ­separated 
by unshaded grassland (i.e., habitat not suitable 
for either study plant species), and showed no 
signs of M. crucifer presence prior to our releases. 
Each site contained 29–85 H. micrantha rosettes 
(vegetative) or bolting ­(reproductive) plants gen-
erally within a radius of 4–22 m (mean ± SD 
= 0.44 ± 0.49 H. ­micrantha/m2, n = 12 sites). On 
six sites, herein referred to as “Target Common” 
sites, the H. micrantha plants were growing 
­interspersed with 35–98 naturally occurring ros­
ette or bolting C.  officinale plants (0.26  ±  0.35 
C.  ­officinale/m2, n  =  6 sites). The other six sites 
were classified as “Target Rare” sites, and their 
low numbers of C.  officinale (0–7 plants) within 
their evaluation radii were manually removed 
upon discovery, beginning in July 2009 until 
August 2011. “Target Common” and “Target 
Rare” sites were included in the experiment to 
test a separate question regarding the ability of 
M.  crucifer to persist on H.  micrantha in the ab-
sence of C.  officinale (described in Catton et  al. 
2015), and are not directly relevant to the ques-
tions addressed in this manuscript. However, 
we deemed it necessary to analyze the impacts 
of M. crucifer releases on H. micrantha on “Target 
Common” and “Target Rare” sites separately 
because after 2  yr, M.  crucifer populations had 
established on “Target Common” release sites, 
 21508925, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ecs2.1280 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
May 2016 v Volume 7(5) v Article e01280
5
 v www.esajournals.org
CATTON ET AL.
but not on “Target Rare” release sites, indicating 
different weevil population histories (Catton 
et  al. 2015).
On 4 June 2009, 300 M. crucifer were released at 
each of three “Target Common” and three “Target 
Rare” sites. These releases were each three times 
the size of those typically used in the M. crucifer 
biocontrol release program (De Clerck-­Floate et al. 
2005), and were meant to represent a local M. cru-
cifer outbreak. Weevils used for the releases were 
overwintered, ovipositing adults collected from an 
outdoor rearing plot in southern Alberta and had 
an estimated ­female:male ratio of 2.2:1, based on 
a pooled subsample of 300 weevils. Weevils were 
released on the ground at a single marked point 
per site within 1 m of nontarget and target plants 
(when present), to force movement to host plants.
Fates of individual plants on all 12 sites were 
tracked by marking 1 × 1 m permanent quadrats 
around release points or, for nonrelease sites, cen-
tral reference points. Where possible, we sampled 
30 rosettes, 20 bolting plants, and 50 seedlings of 
each species as near to the release or reference 
point as possible. The radius sampled and num-
ber of quadrats laid per site varied with plant den-
sity (8–38 quadrats per site, total = 228 quadrats). 
Hackelia micrantha and C. officinale plants within 
quadrats were mapped to the nearest ~10 cm once 
per year during 3–26 July 2009 (4–7 weeks after 
release), 29 June–23 July 2010, and 5 July–3 Au-
gust 2011. Plants of both species in each quadrat 
were assigned in each year to one of the following 
developmental stages: (1) seedling: a plant with 
cotyledons or ≤3 true leaves, (2) small rosette: a 
vegetative plant with 4–9 true leaves, with all 
leaves <30 cm long, (3) large rosette: a vegetative 
plant with ≥10 true leaves, or at least one leaf 
≥30  cm long, or (4) bolter: a plant with ≥1 bolt 
(i.e., flowering shoot). Flowering H.  micrantha 
were later classified as small bolters (1–2 bolts) 
and large bolters (≥3 bolts) due to high variability 
in seed production. By recording the exact plant 
locations within the permanent quadrats, surviv-
al and growth of individual small rosettes, large 
rosettes, and bolters could be followed up for 
the two transitions following M. crucifer release; 
2009–2010 (“Year 0–1”) and 2010–2011 (“Year 
1–2”). Quadrat plants also were examined each 
year for visible indications of distinctive M. cruci-
fer adult herbivory. Spatial and temporal patterns 
of M. crucifer herbivory on both plant species in 
this experiment are described in detail by Cat-
ton et al. (2014, 2015), but generally were wide-
spread and persistent for C. officinale and limited 
to within 4.25 m of release points and to Year 0 
for H. micrantha regardless of target plant density. 
This pattern indicates that the nontarget herbivo-
ry was driven by a spillover mechanism from the 
temporary outbreak densities of weevils onsite 
following releases (Catton et al. 2014, 2015).
Fecundity of all reproductive plants was esti-
mated in each year. Both plant species produce 
multiple bolts per plant, each with many flow-
ers. Each flower produces a maximum of four 
nutlets (i.e., a tetrad). The number of tetrads per 
bolt was counted once each year when seed set 
of both species was complete (July/August 2009–
2011). Between 43 and 50% of H. micrantha bolts 
and 4–13% of C. officinale bolts were <75% intact 
because of trampling damage or seed remov-
al by grazing cattle. Based on our experimental 
questions regarding the impacts of the biocon-
trol weevil on plant population dynamics, we 
estimated the biological potential for plants to 
produce seeds, disregarding trampling damage. 
When bolts were ≥75% intact, we obtained an ex-
act count of the number of tetrads that appeared 
to contain ≥1 viable nutlet. When bolts were not 
intact, the number of tetrads per bolt was esti-
mated for each year with the best available in-
formation, in the following order; site-­specific 
or all-­sites regressions between bolt height and 
tetrad count, or site-­specific or all-­sites average 
tetrad count per bolt (Appendix S1). Total viable 
seed counts per bolt per year were calculated by 
multiplying the number of tetrads by the aver-
age number of viable nutlets per tetrad for each 
species (C. officinale mean = 2.60, n = 484 tetrads; 
H. micrantha mean = 2.16, n = 2209 tetrads). These 
values were calculated from a subsample of in-
florescence branches destructively sampled from 
quadrat plants between 28 July and 6 August 
2010 (25 C. officinale from five study sites and 93 
H. micrantha from 11 study sites).
Construction and analysis of matrix  
population models
Stage-­based transition matrices were developed 
by pooling plants in each treatment (release or 
nonrelease), transition (Year 0–1 or Year 1–2), 
and species (i.e., C. officinale on “Target Common” 
sites, H.  micrantha on “Target Common” sites, 
 21508925, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ecs2.1280 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
May 2016 v Volume 7(5) v Article e01280
6
 v www.esajournals.org
CATTON ET AL.
or H.  micrantha on “Target Rare” sites) combi-
nation, according to the life history models for-
mulated from our observations in the field 
(Figs.  1 and 2, Table  1). Plants were pooled 
among the three sites within each treatment 
category to mitigate the effects of small sample 
sizes for some stages (occasionally ≤5 plants 
across all three sites, Appendix S2), following 
Horvitz and Schemske (1995) and Rooney and 
Gross (2003). Rates of rosette and bolter 
transitions between stages were separated into 
binomial probabilities (e.g., survival, growth or 
transitioning given survival, bolting given tran-
sitioning, etc.) and parameterized using overall 
pooled proportions in the first year of each 
transition (Morris and Doak 2002). Fecundity 
values were calculated using a generalized linear 
model (GLM) with Poisson errors and a log link 
function. Sample sizes for each stage in each 
matrix are detailed in Appendix S2. Seed sur-
vival, germination and dormancy, and seedling 
survival vital rates were parameterized from a 
separate seedling emergence field experiment in 
our study area (detailed in Appendix S3), and 
the same set of these values was used in all 
matrices for each species. The only seedling vital 
rate that could be calculated from the rangeland 
release experiment was seedling to rosette growth. 
Density-­dependence was not included in the 
matrix models to conserve the ability to analyze 
models analytically, and because excluding intra-
specific density-­dependence from models may be 
appropriate in situations where interspecific com-
petition exists as it did on our natural rangeland 
study sites (Crone et al. 2011). However, the pos-
sibility of intraspecific density-­dependence in the 
early life stage vital rates of seedling and rosette 
survival and growth were evaluated and judged 
to be likely inconsequential to the comparisons be-
tween release and nonrelease sites (Appendix S4).
The dominant eigenvalues of the transition 
matrices represent the projected stable popula-
tion growth rate of a population under consistent 
conditions (λ, Caswell 2001), and were calculated 
using the package ‘popbio’ in R v2.15.2 (Stubben 
and Milligan 2007, R Development Core Team 
2014). For each vital rate and for λ, 95% bootstrap 
confidence intervals (CI) were determined as the 
2.5% and 97.5% quantiles from a distribution of 
re-­calculated values derived from re-­sampling 
plant fates with replacement within plant life 
stages, holding sample sizes constant, for 10,000 
iterations (Caswell 2001).
The likelihood that the observed differences in 
matrix vital rates and λ between treatments (re-
lease vs. nonrelease) or transition years occurred 
by chance was assessed using randomization tests 
(Caswell 2001). Observed differences in λ and ­vital 
rates between categories were compared with 
null distributions generated from 10,000 random 
­permutations of individuals between the ­matrices 
Fig.  1. Life cycle diagrams for C.  officinale and 
H.  micrantha. Arrows represent the possible fates of 
surviving plants in each life stage from 1 yr to the next. 
Death can occur at any stage. Dotted lines represent 
transitions for newly produced seed.
 21508925, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ecs2.1280 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
May 2016 v Volume 7(5) v Article e01280
7
 v www.esajournals.org
CATTON ET AL.
being tested, keeping sample sizes for each life 
stage constant with the observed data. P-values 
were calculated as the proportion of the random 
permutations that were greater (one-­tailed) or 
more extreme (two-­tailed) than the observed dif-
ference, and were compared to the predetermined 
level for statistical significance of α = 0.05. We used 
one-­tailed tests when testing for a treatment effect 
within transition years for λ under the alternate 
hypothesis that M. crucifer releases would reduce 
λ, and two-­tailed tests for the transition year effect 
within treatments for λ and for all vital rate com-
parisons because expected effects for these compar-
isons were not intuitive. The null distribution for 
the effects of ­treatment within transition year was 
generated by randomly permuting individuals 
across release and nonrelease sites within transition 
years. Similarly, the null distribution for the effect 
of transition year within treatment was generated 
by randomly permuting individuals across transi-
tion years within treatments. Interactions were test-
ed by comparing the observed standard deviation 
of the differences in parameters between transition 
years (i.e., slopes) within treatments to the null dis-
tribution of standard deviations generated from 
the random permutations (Caswell 2001).
Fig. 2. Transition matrix frameworks for C. officinale and H. micrantha. Abbreviated parameters are defined in 
Table 1.
 21508925, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ecs2.1280 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
May 2016 v Volume 7(5) v Article e01280
8
 v www.esajournals.org
CATTON ET AL.
We conducted a retrospective analysis of how 
each vital rate contributed to differences in λ in 
each comparison using a modified life table re-
sponse experiment (LTRE) as described by El-
derd and Doak (2006): 
where λt and λr are the treatment (release) and 
reference (nonrelease) population growth rates, 
respectively, a is the matrix element, m and n are 
the row and column, vp is an individual vital 
rate, p is the number of vital rates, At and Ar are 
the treatment and reference transition matrices, 
respectively.
Confidence intervals and the probability of a 
value occurring under the null hypothesis of equal 
populations (P-­values) for LTRE contributions 
were calculated using identical methods to those 
for vital rates and λ, using two-­tailed tests. Inter-
actions between treatment and transition year ef-
fects for each vital rate contribution were tested as 
the probability of the observed difference between 
transition years occurring given the generated 
null distribution. We did not conduct prospective 
analyses such as elasticity calculations because 
these analyses are only valid for very small hy-
pothetical perturbations in vital rates, while our 
interest lay in retrospectively identifying and un-
derstanding the observed demographic changes 
in our experiment (e.g., Bruna and Oli 2005).
Finally, because nontarget herbivory was 
highly aggregated (95% of M. crucifer nontarget 
herbivory was limited to Year 0 and to <4.25 m 
from release points, Catton et  al. 2014, 2015), 
we performed an additional, more conservative 
analysis testing for potential population-­level 
impacts to H. micrantha near release points. Ad-
ditional H. micrantha matrices for each transition 
year were calculated using plants pooled from all 
release sites either within or outside the 4.25 m 
radius from release points. Due to the fine-­scale 
nature of this within-­site spatial analysis, five 
H.  micrantha plants >15  m from release points 
were excluded from analysis as distance outliers, 
and three very large H. micrantha with extreme-
ly high seed counts that all by chance occurred 
>4.25 m from release points were excluded from 
analysis as fecundity outliers. These outlier plants 
were removed only from the within-­patch spatial 
analysis.
Results
Cynoglossum officinale dynamics
Population growth rate for the target plant, 
C.  officinale, ranged from 0.807 to 1.138, with 
the only λ value below the replacement rate 
of 1.0 occurring on release sites in Year 0–1 
휆t −휆r =
∑
m,n
∑
p
(
vt
p −vr
p
)
휕휆
휕am,n
휕am,n
휕vp
|||| 1
2(At + Ar)
Table 1. Symbols and definitions of vital rates used 
to construct C. officinale and H. micrantha transition 
matrices (displayed in Fig. 2).
Symbol
Definition
Both plant species
sF†
Survival of viable new seed
hF‡
Viable new seed lands on suitable habitat,  
given survival
gF†
Viable new seed germinates, given survival and 
suitable habitat
sD†
Survival of seed in seed bank
gD†
Seed in seed bank germinates, given survival
j‡
Seed grows to SR (i.e., skipping G), given 
survival and germination
sG†
Survival of G
gG†
G grows, given survival
lG
G becomes LR, given survival and growth
sSR
Survival of SR
gSR
SR grows, given survival
bSR
SR bolts, given survival and growth
sLR
Survival of LR
tLR
LR transitions, given survival
bLR
LR bolts, given survival and transitioning
C. officinale
sB
Survival of B
tB
B becomes LR, given survival
F
Number of viable seeds produced
H. micrantha
lLR
LR becomes LB, given survival, transitioning, 
and bolting
sSB
Survival of SB
tSB
SB transitions, given survival
bSB
SB bolts, given survival and transitioning  
(i.e., becomes LB)
lSB
SB becomes LR, given survival, transitioning,  
and nonbolting
FSB
Number of viable seeds produced by SB
sLB
Survival of LB
tLB
LB transitions, given survival
bLB
LB bolts, given survival and transitioning  
(i.e., becomes SB)
FLB
Number of viable seeds produced by LB
Notes: All definitions refer to proportions (= probabilities), 
except fecundities, which are counts. Life stage abbreviations 
(in capital letters) are as in Figs. 1 and 2. F = viable new seed.
† Parameter value determined from a separate seedling 
emergence experiment (see Appendix S3).
‡ Parameter value assigned arbitrarily.
 21508925, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ecs2.1280 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
May 2016 v Volume 7(5) v Article e01280
9
 v www.esajournals.org
CATTON ET AL.
(Fig.  3a). In that transition year, λ on release 
sites was significantly lower than on nonrelease 
sites, but just one transition year later, λ from 
both treatments were above 1.0 and indistin-
guishable. The impact on λ of transition year 
within treatment was significant for release 
sites and not nonrelease sites (i.e., slopes in 
Fig. 3a), but the interaction between treatment 
and transition year (i.e., the difference in 
slopes) 
was 
not 
statistically 
significant 
(P  =  0.104).
LTRE analysis identified several C.  officinale 
vital rates that made contributions to differenc-
es in λ on release relative to nonrelease sites that 
were unlikely to be due to chance, in particu-
lar, survival of small and large rosettes (Fig. 4). 
A significant contribution means that there was 
a sufficiently nonrandom distribution of plant 
fates and their impacts between release and non-
release sites. It should be noted that significance 
of each vital rate contribution is measured in re-
sponse to its own null distribution rather than 
the magnitudes of other vital rates. Therefore, 
significant observed contributions needed not 
be overly large (e.g., sSB in Fig. 5a), while large 
observed contributions could be indistinguish-
able from randomly generated values (e.g., F in 
Fig. 4). For C. officinale on release relative to non-
release sites in Year 0–1, the sum of significant 
contributions was sufficient to cause a significant 
decrease in λ and a shift from positive popula-
tion growth to negative growth (Fig. 4, Table 2). 
Therefore, we can be confident that the difference 
in λ observed in this comparison is a nonrandom 
treatment effect resulting from decreased rosette 
survival. This same effect was not observed in 
Year 1–2. Significant interactions between how 
contributions to differences in λ between release 
relative to nonrelease sites differed between the 
transition years (i.e., differences in the heights of 
gray and black bars for each vital rate in Fig. 4) 
demonstrate that the contributions of small and 
large rosette survival were significantly more 
negative in Year 0–1 than Year 1–2 (P ≤ 0.035), and 
nearly significant for transitioning of surviving 
large rosettes (P = 0.053). Interactions were calcu-
lated based on their own null distributions gen-
erated from subtracting Year 0–1 permutation 
contributions from Year 1–2 permutation contri-
butions and therefore did not always ­correspond 
Fig.  3. Population growth rate (λ) for (a) C.  officinale and (b, c) H.  micrantha on M.  crucifer release and 
nonrelease sites in transitions Year 0–1 and Year 1–2. λ values in (a–c) were calculated using matrices constructed 
from C. officinale or H. micrantha plants pooled from three sites per category. Values in (d) were calculated from 
pooled H. micrantha plants near (≤4.25 m) or far (>4.25 m) from release points on all six release sites. Values 
above the dotted reference line of λ=1.0 represent projected population growth, while values below the line 
represent projected population shrinkage. Bars represent 95% bootstrap CIs. Statistically significant differences 
calculated by randomization tests are indicated by the symbols: *** = P < 0.001, ** = 0.001 < P ≤ 0.010, * 0.010 
< P ≤ 0.050, + = 0.050 < P ≤ 0.100. Symbols for the effect of treatment (release or nonrelease) within transition year 
are immediately above transition year numbers, and symbols for the effect of transition year within treatment 
are near the lines connecting the points. There were no significant interactions of transition year × treatment.
 21508925, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ecs2.1280 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
May 2016 v Volume 7(5) v Article e01280
10
 v www.esajournals.org
CATTON ET AL.
with significance or nonsignificance in annual vi-
tal rate contributions. 
Raw vital rate values and comparisons are pre-
sented in Appendix S5. LTREs for the transition 
year effect within treatments yielded very similar 
results to the treatment effect within transition 
year, and are presented in Appendix S6. Number 
of plants for each species and site category per 
year are presented in Appendix S7.
Hackelia micrantha dynamics
Nontarget λ values ranged from 1.533 to 1.831, 
with all predicting positive long-­term population 
growth (λ  >  1.0, Fig.  3b,c). Upon returning to 
several release sites 8  d after release, we ob-
served some individual impacts of reduced 
fecundity on H. micrantha as some bolting stems 
within 3  m of release points were girdled by 
adult M.  crucifer feeding damage, preventing 
seed development on those stems. However, 
these individual impacts did not translate to 
the population level as the comparison of 
H.  micrantha plants from all M.  crucifer release 
sites within or outside 4.25 m of release points 
indicated no significant differences in λ in treat-
ment or transition year (Fig.  3d).
The only significant effects of treatment (i.e., re-
lease vs. nonrelease) within transition year on λ 
occurred on “Target Common” sites in Year 1–2, 
and on “Target Rare” sites in Year 0–1 (Fig. 3b, 
c, Table 2), although all H. micrantha λ (and 95% 
CIs) were still well above 1.0. LTRE analysis for 
the two significant comparisons demonstrated 
that differences in several vital rates made signif-
icant contributions to differences in λ observed 
(Fig.  5). These contributions mostly involved 
small bolters, but were insufficient to account 
for significant decreases in λ (Table 2). In other 
words, we cannot be confident that the observed 
difference in H. micrantha λ between release and 
nonrelease sites in the two comparisons in ques-
tion did not occur simply by chance.
Discussion
The analyses and results presented here 
demonstrate the value of performing demog-
raphy experiments to examine both the mag-
nitude of and mechanisms behind target and 
nontarget population-­level impacts in weed 
biocontrol. As a “search and destroy” agent 
(Murdoch et  al. 1985) that also happens to be 
oligophagous, M.  crucifer presents a rich op-
portunity to study context-­specific impacts of 
herbivory on populations of both its preferred 
and target host C.  officinale and the novel non-
target host, H.  micrantha. Furthermore, as op-
posed to the seed-­feeding agents used in earlier 
nontarget studies (e.g., R. conicus in Louda et al. 
1997), M.  crucifer feeds on both root and shoot 
tissue of its target and nontarget hosts (Catton 
et  al. 2015, R. De Clerck-­Floate and H. Catton, 
unpublished manuscript). Damage to conductive 
and storage tissues can reduce the vital rates 
of all plant life stages (Hunter 2001), therefore 
the experimental demographic approach used 
here was necessary to uncover the magnitude 
and mechanism of any M.  crucifer impact on 
population growth rates. The data demonstrate 
that if the most extreme (i.e., Year 0) M. crucifer 
densities in this study were to persist for many 
years, vital rate impacts on release sites would 
cause the C. officinale populations to eventually 
Fig. 4. Contributions of differences in C. officinale 
vital rates to differences in λ on M. crucifer release sites 
relative to nonrelease sites within transitions Year 0–1 
and Year 1–2. Bar heights and error bars represent life 
table response experiment values for the observed 
data and their 95% bootstrap CIs. Vital rates with 
contributions 
significantly 
different 
than 
zero 
according to randomization tests are indicated by the 
symbols: *** = P < 0.001, ** = 0.001 < P ≤ 0.010, * = 0.010 < 
P ≤ 0.050, + = 0.050 < P ≤ 0.100. Symbols for significant 
interactions are immediately below the panel.
 21508925, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ecs2.1280 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
May 2016 v Volume 7(5) v Article e01280
11
 v www.esajournals.org
CATTON ET AL.
decline to extirpation (λ < 1.0), while the H. mi-
crantha populations would continue to grow 
(λ  >  1.4). By determining which vital rates 
contributed most to differences in both target 
and nontarget λ between M. crucifer release and 
nonrelease sites, we can infer from our biolog-
ical knowledge of the herbivore and its host 
plants which vital rate impacts can reasonably 
be attributed to damage caused by the insect. 
In the following sections, we interpret the quan-
titative demographic impacts observed in con-
text with the known biology of this system. 
Such an interpretation is a crucial step for 
connecting mechanism with effect, for gaining 
insight into differences in the agent–target weed 
interaction between the native and introduced 
ranges, and for understanding the nature of 
the herbivore–plant interactions in this biocon-
trol system.
Impact of M. crucifer on C. officinale
The matrix models indicated that C.  officinale 
λ values always projected positive population 
growth (λ  >  1.0), except on M.  crucifer release 
sites in Year 0–1. In that “outbreak” transition 
year, λ on release sites was significantly lower 
than on nonrelease sites, a difference demon-
strated by the LTRE to be driven by decreases 
in survival of both small and large rosettes. 
Because >90% of flowering C.  officinale plants 
die after seed production, and the seed bank 
for this species lasts only 1–2 years (Van Breemen 
Fig. 5. Contributions of differences in H. micrantha vital rates to differences in λ on M. crucifer release sites 
relative to nonrelease sites within transitions Year 0–1 and Year 1–2 on (a) “Target Common” and (b) “Target 
Rare” sites. Bar heights and error bars represent life table response experiment values for the observed data and 
their 95% bootstrap CIs. Vital rates with contributions significantly different than zero according to randomization 
tests are indicated by the symbols: *** = P < 0.001, ** = 0.001 < P ≤ 0.010, * = 0.010 < P ≤ 0.050, + = 0.050 < P ≤ 0.100. 
Symbols for significant interactions are immediately below each panel.
 21508925, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ecs2.1280 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
May 2016 v Volume 7(5) v Article e01280
12
 v www.esajournals.org
CATTON ET AL.
1984, Williams et  al. 2010), the target weed 
population is highly dependent on the survival 
and growth of rosettes for seed supply from 
year to year. Cynoglossum officinale rosette mor-
tality can be linked to M.  crucifer as target 
plants sampled from 10 sites in our study area 
0–4  years after weevil release (including the 
“Target Common” sites 2  yr after release) had 
a high probability of containing eggs or larvae 
(Catton et al. 2015). Even very small C. officinale 
rosettes with root crown diameters of <5  mm 
contained between 1 and 9  M.  crucifer eggs or 
larvae more than half the time (Catton et  al. 
2015), which would severely reduce the avail-
ability of connective tissue between root and 
shoot in these small plants. Similarly, the con-
generic root crown weevil Mogulones larvatus 
Goeze, released as a biocontrol agent in Australia 
against Echium plantagineum L. (Boraginaceae) 
also decreased survival rates of its target weed 
rosettes (Sheppard et  al. 2001).
Interestingly, our experiment revealed a key 
difference in the M.  crucifer–C.  officinale interac-
tion between its native and introduced ranges. 
Observational and experimental impact studies 
of the M. crucifer–C. officinale interaction in Europe 
demonstrated a significant decrease of 30–35% 
in plant fecundity, but no effect of the weevil on 
rosette mortality (Prins et al. 1992, Williams et al. 
2010). The strong impact on rosette survival ob-
served in our study may explain why M. crucifer 
has been an effective biocontrol insect for C. offi-
cinale in Canada. The quick 2-­yr collapse of C. of-
ficinale populations after release observed by De 
Clerck-­Floate and Wikeem (2009) occurred in too 
short of a time frame for differences in fecundity 
alone to impact plant population abundance, al-
though in that study, weevil effects were interact-
ing with drought conditions. Fecundity values for 
C. officinale on our release sites were not signifi-
cantly lower than on nonrelease sites; however, we 
suspect our experiment may have underestimated 
the impact of M. crucifer on this target weed vital 
rate. A single, within-­season insect release may 
not approximate the cumulative impact on C. offic-
inale of mild M. crucifer root-­feeding over multiple 
years that is common in the native range (Schwarz­
laender 1997), and is likely to occur in the intro-
duced range when and where M. crucifer are at low 
densities prior to population explosions. Further 
study for a longer time period with sub-­outbreak 
M.  crucifer densities would better determine 
any fecundity impact on C.  officinale population 
growth rates with and without M. crucifer in the 
introduced range. Ironically, the main limitation 
to conducting such an experiment is the difficulty 
in finding robust C. officinale populations multiple 
years after M.  crucifer release in Canada (R. De 
Clerck-­Floate, personal observation), as rapid local 
weed extirpation is the usual outcome of weevil 
introduction.
It should be noted that the impacts discussed 
above were only observed in the transition 
­immediately following release (Year 0–1). Just 
Table 2. Observed and hypothetical λ for C. officinale and H. micrantha on M. crucifer release and nonrelease 
sites within transitions Year 0–1 and Year 1–2.
Year
Observed 
λnrel
Observed 
λrel
Observed 
λrel–λnrel
Pobs
λdiff at P = 0.05
∑ significant 
contributions
Psig
λhrel
C. officinale
Year 0–1
1.061
0.807
−0.255
<0.001
−0.135
−0.149
0.031
0.912
Year 1–2
1.138
1.089
−0.049
0.336
−0.168
0
0.516
1.138
H. micrantha “Target Common”
Year 0–1
1.637
1.701
0.064
0.618
−0.300
0
0.490
1.637
Year 1–2
1.831
1.588
−0.243
0.037
−0.227
−0.163
0.121
1.668
H. micrantha “Target Rare”
Year 0–1
1.765
1.533
−0.232
0.044
−0.223
−0.074
0.282
1.691
Year 1–2
1.772
1.679
−0.092
0.290
−0.267
−0.028
0.420
1.744
Notes: Reported for each transition year are observed λ for release (λrel) and nonrelease (λnrel) sites, the probability of the 
observed difference in λ between release and nonrelease sites occurring if sites were identical according to randomization tests 
(Pobs), the difference in λ necessary for statistical significance (λdiff at P = 0.05), the sum of the significant vital rate contributions 
from the life table response experiment (see Figs. 4 and 5), the probability of the difference in λ derived from only significant 
vital rate contributions occurring if sites were identical (Psig), and the hypothetical new λrel (=λhrel) calculated by discounting 
λnrel by significant vital rate contributions.
 21508925, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ecs2.1280 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
May 2016 v Volume 7(5) v Article e01280
13
 v www.esajournals.org
CATTON ET AL.
one transition year later, C. officinale λ values were 
nearly identical on release and nonrelease sites, 
driven mainly by recovery in rosette survival and 
growth on release sites, and 2 yr after release, ab-
solute numbers of small rosettes rebounded to 
prerelease numbers (Appendix S7). This recov-
ery may be the result of two factors: (1) site-­level 
changes in weevil density between the years, and 
(2) moisture availability. Our releases of 300 wee-
vils per site were three times higher than the stan-
dard release density for M. crucifer biological con-
trol (De Clerck-­Floate et al. 2005, De Clerck-­Floate 
and Wikeem 2009), and likely represented a tem-
porary “outbreak” of biocontrol agents that could 
not be sustained by the C. officinale available onsite. 
Weevil density was not measured over the 3 yr in 
this study, however, a drop in site-­level agent den-
sity after release can be inferred because the pro-
portion of C. officinale with visible M. crucifer adult 
feeding damage dropped significantly 1 yr after 
release (Catton et al. 2015). Cynoglossum officinale 
has a short-­term seed bank (1–2 yr, Van Breemen 
1984, Williams et al. 2010), therefore in this exper-
iment new rosettes could still appear from older 
seed in Years 1 and 2 after the temporary weevil 
outbreak. However, in situations where C.  offi-
cinale populations are sufficient to support local 
M. crucifer outbreaks for multiple years, sustained 
reduction of rosette survival would deplete the 
seed bank, thus leading to a reduction in compen-
satory target weed recruitment over time. In terms 
of climate, Year 1–2 was a better transition year for 
multiple C. officinale vital rates on nonrelease sites 
(Appendix S5), including small rosette growth 
and bolting probability of large rosettes. While 
Year 0 (2009) had an average amount of spring 
and summer precipitation, Year 1 was more than 
twice as wet in the study region (Appendix S8). 
Cynoglossum officinale is water-­limited, especial-
ly early in its life cycle (De Jong and Klinkhamer 
1988b). If moisture availability in the first year of a 
transition is more influential on a vital rate than in 
the second year, then Year 1–2 C. officinale plants 
could have benefited from the extra precipitation 
in Year 1. The stress imposed on plants by root-­
feeding may be increased with decreasing mois-
ture availability (Blossey and Hunt-­Joshi 2003).
Impact of M. crucifer on H. micrantha
In contrast with C. officinale, all calculated λ’s 
for H. micrantha were well above 1.0, projecting 
positive population growth under all observed 
circumstances. This result is logical given that 
this plant is polycarpic and survival of repro-
ductive individuals was very high, between 80 
and 100%. Unlike C.  officinale, reproductive 
H.  micrantha create new plants without being 
lost from the population themselves, resulting 
in higher λ values in the nontarget plant. Most 
λ comparisons for H. micrantha showed no sig-
nificant differences, including plants on release 
sites within and outside of the 4.25  m radius 
where 95% of nontarget herbivory was observed 
(Fig. 3d). The data show no evidence that H. mi-
crantha populations will decline from M. crucifer 
herbivory, regardless of the weevil outbreak 
conditions of the release year or the distance 
from release points. The only significant dif-
ferences between H. micrantha release and non-
release site λ’s were on “Target Common” sites 
in Year 1–2 and “Target Rare” sites in Year 
0–1, but all λ’s were still well above 1.0, and 
magnitudes of significant vital rate contributions 
were not sufficient to explain the differences 
in λ observed. Therefore, the differences H. mi-
crantha in λ values cannot be distinguished from 
simple random variation.
We conclude from the combination of the re-
sults presented here that there is no conclusive 
evidence that H. micrantha suffered any reduc-
tion in λ or threat to population persistence in 
response to M.  crucifer releases in this experi-
ment. Theory predicts that if impact of target 
and nontarget herbivory at the individual plant 
level is equal and neither species experiences 
refuges from herbivory, nontarget plant popula-
tions with a high ratio of λ to herbivory rate are 
likely to persist (Holt and Hochberg 2001). Hack-
elia micrantha displayed this robustness with a 
higher λ and a much lower herbivory rate than 
C.  officinale (Catton et  al. 2015). The nontarget 
plant further benefitted from spatial, temporal, 
and probabilistic refuges from M.  crucifer her-
bivory (Catton et al. 2014, 2015), which served to 
‘dilute’ the influence of any individual impacts 
on population-­level H. micrantha vital rates and 
population growth rates. Therefore, even as lo-
cal M. crucifer and C. officinale populations likely 
boom and bust around them (Catton et al. 2015), 
H. micrantha populations are able to withstand 
the occurrence of incidental nontarget herbivory 
resulting from weevil outbreaks. However, care 
 21508925, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ecs2.1280 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
May 2016 v Volume 7(5) v Article e01280
14
 v www.esajournals.org
CATTON ET AL.
should be taken when extrapolating these re-
sults to other regions or other nontarget species. 
For example, plants may be more vulnerable to 
the effects of root-­feeding under dry conditions 
(Blossey and Hunt-­Joshi 2003). And, while it 
is tempting to extrapolate our results to other 
nontarget species that may be used by M. cruci-
fer, it must be kept in mind that even congeners 
can display very different population dynamics 
(Buckley et al. 2010).
The results of this study provide quantitative 
support for the idea that herbivory can, but does 
not always, lead to population-­level impacts to 
plants (Crawley 1989, Maron and Crone 2006). 
Therefore, herbivory on individual target and 
nontarget plants in weed biocontrol should not 
be assumed to necessarily cause population-­
level impacts without further examination of 
herbivory patterns in conjunction with individ-
ual impacts, plant life histories, vital rates, and 
population growth rates. Experimental demo-
graphic postrelease field studies such as this one 
are imperative for simultaneously evaluating 
population-­level impacts of oligophagous weed 
biocontrol agents on target and nontarget plants. 
Such knowledge can help decision-­makers eval-
uate future potential agents with a balance of risk 
and benefit in mind.
Acknowledgments
We thank W. Van Der Weide, S. McLeod and 
K. Tiberg for detailed and dedicated field assistance 
and helpful discussions. We are grateful to E. Pavlik, 
B. van Hezewijk, and K. Floate for helpful discus-
sions and guidance; C. Andrews, R. Wilson, and 
C. Durand for technical assistance, and S. and L. 
Hansen for the use of their rangeland. We thank 
our anonymous reviewers for improving earlier 
versions of this manuscript. Funding was provided 
by the Agriculture and Agri-­Food Canada Peer 
Review Program, BC Ministry of Forests, Lands 
and Natural Resource Operations, the Cattle 
Industry Development Council of BC, a NSERC 
Discovery Grant to R.G.L., a NSERC Alexander 
Graham Bell Canada Graduate Scholarship, the UBC 
Okanagan Irving K. Barber School of Arts and 
Sciences International Education Travel Subsidy, 
the UBC Graduate Student International Research 
Mobility Award, and an Entomological Society of 
Canada Graduate Research Travel Scholarship to 
H.A.C., and the Wyoming Biocontrol Steering 
Committee.
Literature Cited
Agrawal, A. A., A. P. Hastings, M. T. J. Johnson, J. L. 
Maron, and J.-P. Salminen. 2012. Insect herbivores 
drive real-­time ecological and evolutionary change 
in plant populations. Science 338:113–116.
Andreas, J. E., M. Schwarzländer, and R. De 
­Clerck-­Floate. 2008. The occurrence and potential 
relevance of post-­release, nontarget attack by Mogu­
lones cruciger, a biocontrol agent for Cynoglossum 
officinale in Canada. Biological Control 46:304–311.
Baker, J. L., N. A. P. Webber, and K. K. Johnson. 2004. 
Non-target impacts of Aphthona nigriscutis, a bi-
ological control agent for Euphorbia esula (leafy 
spurge), on a native plant Euphorbia robusta. Pages 
247–251 in J. M. Cullen, D. T. Briese, D. J. Kriticos, 
W. M. Lonsdale, L. Morin, and J. K. Scott, editors. 
Proceedings of the XI International Symposium on 
Biological Control of Weeds, Canberra, Australia, 
April 27–May 2, 2003. CSIRO Entomology, Canber-
ra, Australia.
Blossey, B., and T. R. Hunt-Joshi. 2003. Belowground 
herbivory by insects: influence on plants and abo-
veground herbivores. Annual Review of Entomol-
ogy 48:521–547.
Bruna, E. M., and M. K. Oli. 2005. Demographic effects 
of habitat fragmentation on a tropical herb: life-­
table response experiments. Ecology 86:1816–1824.
Buckley, Y. M., S. Ramula, S. P. Blomberg, J. H. Burns, 
E. E. Crone, J. Ehrlén, T. M. Knight, J.-B. Pichan-
court, H. Quested, and G. M. Wardle. 2010. Causes 
and consequences of variation in plant popula-
tion growth rate: a synthesis of matrix population 
models in a phylogenetic context. Ecology Letters 
13:1182–1197.
Butler, J. L., M. S. Parker, and J. T. Murphy. 2006. Effica-
cy of flea beetle control of leafy spurge in Montana 
and South Dakota. Rangeland Ecology & Manage-
ment 59:453–461.
Carson, W. P., S. M. Hovick, A. J. Baumert, D. E. Bun-
ker, and T. H. Pendergast IV. 2008. Evaluating the 
post-­release efficacy of invasive plant biocontrol 
by insects: a comprehensive approach. Arthropod-­
Plant Interactions 2:77–86.
Caswell, H. 2001. Matrix population models: construc-
tion, analysis and interpretation, Second edition. 
Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, Massachusetts, 
USA.
Catton, H. A., R. G. Lalonde, and R. A. De ­Clerck-Floate. 
2014. Differential host-­finding abilities by a weed 
biocontrol insect create within-­patch spatial refug-
es for nontarget plants. Environmental Entomolo-
gy 43:1333–1344.
Catton, H. A., R. G. Lalonde, and R. A. De ­Clerck-Floate. 
2015. Nontarget herbivory by a weed biocontrol 
 21508925, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ecs2.1280 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
May 2016 v Volume 7(5) v Article e01280
15
 v www.esajournals.org
CATTON ET AL.
­insect is limited to spillover, reducing the chance of 
population-­level impacts. Ecological Applications 
25:517–530.
Corn, J. G., J. M. Story, and L. J. White. 2006. Impacts 
of the biological control agent Cyphocleonus achates 
on spotted knapweed, Centaurea maculosa, in exper-
imental plots. Biological Control 37:75–81.
Crawley, M. J. 1989. Insect herbivores and plant pop-
ulation dynamics. Annual Review of Entomology 
34:531–564.
Crone, E. E., et al. 2011. How do plant ecologists use 
matrix population models? Ecology Letters 14:1–8.
Dauer, J. T., P. B. McEvoy, and J. Van Sickle. 2012. Con-
trolling a plant invader by targeted disruption of its 
life cycle. Journal of Applied Ecology 49:322–330.
De Clerck-Floate, R. 1996. The role of pre-release stud-
ies in developing a biocontrol strategy for hound’s-
tongue in Canada. Pages 143–148 in V. C. Moran, 
and J. H. Hoffmann, editors. Proceedings of the IX 
International Symposium on Biological Control of 
Weeds, Stellenbosch, South Africa, January 19–26, 
2006. University of Cape Town, Rondebosch, South 
Africa.
De Clerck-Floate, R. 1997. Cattle as dispersers of 
hound’s-­tongue on rangeland in southeastern 
British Columbia. Journal of Range Management 
50:239–243.
De Clerck-Floate, R., and M. Schwarzländer. 2002. Host 
specificity of Mogulones cruciger (Coleoptera: Cur-
culionidae), a biocontrol agent for houndstongue 
(Cynoglossum officinale), with emphasis on testing 
of native North American Boraginaceae. Biocontrol 
Science and Technology 12:293–306.
De Clerck-Floate, R., and B. Wikeem. 2009. Influence of 
release size on establishment and impact of a root 
weevil for the biocontrol of houndstongue (Cyno-
glossum officinale). Biocontrol Science and Technol-
ogy 19:169–183.
De Clerck-Floate, R. A., B. Wikeem, and R. S. Bourch-
ier. 2005. Early establishment and dispersal of the 
weevil, Mogulones cruciger (Coleoptera: Curculion-
idae) for biological control of houndstongue (Cy-
noglossum officinale) in British Columbia, Canada. 
Biocontrol Science and Technology 15:173–190.
De Jong, T. J., and P. G. L. Klinkhamer. 1988a. Popu-
lation ecology of the biennials Cirsium vulgare and 
Cynoglossum officinale in a coastal sand-­dune area. 
Journal of Ecology 76:336–382.
De Jong, T. J., and P. G. L. Klinkhamer. 1988b. Seed-
ling establishment of the biennials Cirsium vulgare 
and Cynoglossum officinale in a sand-­dune area: the 
importance of water for differential survival and 
growth. Journal of Ecology 76:393–402.
Delfosse, E. S. 2005. Risk and ethics in biological con-
trol. Biological Control 35:319–329.
Dhileepan, K. 2001. Effectiveness of introduced 
biocontrol insects on the weed Parthenium hys-
terophorus (Asteraceae) in Australia. Bulletin of 
Entomological Research 91:167–176.
Dhileepan, K., M. Treviño, and S. Raghu. 2006. Tem-
poral patterns in incidence and abundance of 
Aconophora compressa (Hemiptera: Membracidae), 
a ­biological control agent for Lantana camara, on 
target and nontarget plants. Environmental Ento-
mology 35:1001–1012.
Douglas, G. W., G. B. Straley, D. V. Meidinger, and J. 
Pojar. 1998. Illustrated flora of British Columbia. 
Volume 2: Dicotyledons (Balsaminaceae through 
Cucurbitaceae). British Columbia Ministry of En-
vironment, Lands & Parks and British Columbia 
Ministry of Forests, Victoria, British Columbia, 
Canada.
Downing, D. J., and W. W. Pettapiece. 2006. Natural 
regions and subregions of Alberta. Pub. No. T/852. 
Natural Regions Committee, Government of Al-
berta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
Ehrlén, J. 2003. Fitness components versus total demo-
graphic effects: evaluating herbivore impacts on a 
perennial herb. American Naturalist 162:796–810.
Ehrlén, J., K. Syrjänen, R. Leimu, M. Begoña Garcia, 
and K. Lehtilä. 2005. Land use and population 
growth of Primula veris: an experimental demo-
graphic approach. Journal of Applied Ecology 
42:317–326.
Elderd, B. D., and D. F. Doak. 2006. Comparing the 
direct and community-­mediated effects of distur-
bance on plant population dynamics: flooding, 
herbivory and Mimulus guttatus. Journal of Ecology 
94:656–669.
Franco, M., and J. Silvertown. 2004. A comparative de-
mography of plants based upon elasticities of vital 
rates. Ecology 85:531–538.
Garren, J. M., and S. Y. Strauss. 2009. Population-­level 
compensation by an invasive thistle thwarts bio-
logical control from seed predators. Ecological Ap-
plications 19:709–721.
Grevstad, F. S. 2006. Ten-­year impacts of the biological 
control agents Galerucella pusilla and G. calmariensis 
(Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae) on purple loosestrife 
(Lythrum salicaria) in Central New York State. Bio-
logical Control 39:1–8.
Halpern, S. L., and N. Underwood. 2006. Approaches 
for testing herbivore effects on plant population 
dynamics. Journal of Applied Ecology 43:922–929.
Havens, K., C. L. Jolls, J. E. Marik, P. Vitt, A. K. 
­McEachern, and D. Kind. 2012. Effects of a non-­
native biocontrol weevil, Larinus planus, and other 
emerging threats on populations of the federally 
threatened Pitcher’s thistle, Cirsium pitcheri. Bio-
logical Conservation 155:202–211.
 21508925, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ecs2.1280 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
May 2016 v Volume 7(5) v Article e01280
16
 v www.esajournals.org
CATTON ET AL.
Hoddle, M. S. 2004. Restoring balance: using exotic 
species to control invasive exotic species. Conser-
vation Biology 18:38–49.
Hoffmann, J. H., and V. C. Moran. 1998. The popu-
lation dynamics of an introduced tree, Sesbania 
punicea, in South Africa, in response to long-­term 
damage caused by different combinations of three 
species of biological control agents. Oecologia 
114:343–348.
Holt, R. D., and M. E. Hochberg. 2001. Indirect interac-
tions, community modules and biological control: 
a theoretical perspective. Pages 13–37 in E. Wajn-
berg, J. Scott, and P. C. Quimby, editors. Evaluat-
ing indirect ecological effects of biological control. 
CABI Publishing, Wallingford, UK.
Horvitz, C. C., and D. W. Schemske. 1995. Spatiotem-
poral variation in demographic transitions of a 
tropical understory herb: projection matrix analy-
sis. Ecological Monographs 65:155–192.
Hunter, M. D. 2001. Out of sight, out of mind: the im-
pacts of root-­feeding insects in natural and man-
aged systems. Agricultural and Forest Entomology 
3:3–9.
Huntly, N. 1991. Herbivores and the dynamics of com-
munities and ecosystems. Annual Review of Ecolo-
gy and Systematics 22:477–503.
Kim, T. N., N. Underwood, and B. D. Inouye. 2013. 
Insect herbivores change the outcome of plant 
competition through both inter-­and intraspecific 
processes. Ecology 94:1753–1763.
Klinkhamer, P. G. L., and T. J. De Jong. 1988. The im-
portance of small-­scale disturbance for seedling 
establishment in Cirsium vulgare and Cynoglossum 
officinale. Journal of Ecology 76:383–392.
Kriticos, D. J. 2003. The roles of ecological models in 
evaluating weed biological control agents and 
projects. Pages 69–74 in H. Spafford Jacob, and D. 
T. Briese, editors. Improving the selection, testing 
and evaluation of weed biological control agents. 
Proceedings of the CRC for Australian Weed Man-
agement, Biological Control of Weeds Symposium 
and Workshop, September 13, 2002. CRC for Aus-
tralian Weed Management Technical Series No. 7, 
Glen Osmond, Australia.
Lesica, P. 1995. Demography of Astragalus scaphoides 
and effects of herbivory on population growth. 
Great Basin Naturalist 55:142–150.
Louda, S. M., and C. W. O’Brien. 2002. Unexpected 
ecological effects of distributing the exotic weevil 
Larinus planus (F.), for the biological control of Can-
ada thistle. Conservation Biology 16:717–727.
Louda, S. M., D. Kendall, J. Connor, and D. Simberloff. 
1997. Ecological effects of an insect introduced for 
the biological control of weeds. Science 277:1088–
1090.
Louda, S. M., T. A. Rand, A. E. Arnett, A. S. McClay, 
K. Shea, and A. K. McEachern. 2005. Evaluation of 
ecological risk to populations of a threatened plant 
from an invasive biocontrol insect. Ecological Ap-
plications 15:234–249.
Maron, J. L., and E. Crone. 2006. Herbivory: effects 
on plant abundance, distribution and population 
growth. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Bio-
logical Sciences 273:2575–2584.
Maron, J. L., C. C. Horvitz, and J. L. Williams. 2010. 
Using experiments, demography and population 
models to estimate interaction strength based on 
transient and asymptotic dynamics. Journal of 
Ecology 98:290–301.
McFadyen, R. E. 1998. Biological control of weeds. An-
nual Review of Entomology 43:369–393.
van der Meijden, E., P. G. L. Klinkhamer, T. J. De Jong, 
and C. A. M. Van Wijk. 1992. Meta-­population dy-
namics of biennial plants: how to exploit temporary 
habitats. Acta Botanica Neerlandica 41:249–270.
Morin, L., A. M. Reid, N. M. Sims-Chilton, Y. M. Buck-
ley, K. Dhileepan, G. T. Hastwell, T. L. Nordblom, 
and S. Raghu. 2009. Review of approaches to eval-
uate the effectiveness of weed biological control 
agents. Biological Control 51:1–15.
Morris, W. F., and D. F. Doak. 2002. Quantitative 
conservation biology: theory and practice of pop-
ulation viability analysis. Sinauer Associates, 
Sunderland, Massachusetts, USA.
Murdoch, W. W., J. Chesson, and P. L. Chesson. 1985. 
Biological control in theory and practice. American 
Naturalist 125:344–366.
NatureServe. 2012. NatureServe Explorer: An online 
encyclopedia of life: Hackelia micrantha. http://
explorer.natureserve.org/servlet/NatureServe?-
searchName=Hackelia+micrantha
Ortega, Y. K., D. E. Pearson, L. P. Waller, N. J. Stur-
devant, and J. L. Maron. 2012. Population-­level 
compensation impedes biological control of an in-
vasive forb and indirect release of a native grass. 
Ecology 93:783–792.
Pratt, P. D., M. B. Rayamajhi, T. D. Center, P. W. Tip-
ping, and G. S. Wheeler. 2009. The ecological host 
range of an intentionally introduced herbivore: a 
comparison of predicted versus actual host use. Bi-
ological Control 49:146–153.
Prins, A. H., H. W. Nell, and P. G. L. Klinkhamer. 1992. 
Size-­dependent root herbivory on Cynoglossum offi-
cinale. Oikos 65:409–413.
R Development Core Team. 2014. R: A language and 
environment for statistical computing. R Founda-
tion for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria.
Rooney, T. P., and K. Gross. 2003. A demographic study 
of deer browsing impacts on Trillium grandiflorum. 
Plant Ecology 168:267–277.
 21508925, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ecs2.1280 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
May 2016 v Volume 7(5) v Article e01280
17
 v www.esajournals.org
CATTON ET AL.
Rose, K. E., S. M. Louda, and M. Rees. 2005. Demo-
graphic and evolutionary impacts of native and 
invasive insect herbivores on Cirsium canescens. 
Ecology 86:453–465.
Schwarzlaender, M. 1997. Bionomics of Mogulones cru-
ciger (Coleoptera: Curculionidae), a below-­ground 
herbivore for the biological control of hound’s-­
tongue. Environmental Entomology 26:357–365.
Seastedt, T. R., N. Gregory, and D. Buckner. 2003. Ef-
fect of biocontrol insects on diffuse knapweed 
(Centaurea diffusa) in a Colorado grassland. Weed 
Science 51:237–245.
Seastedt, T. R., D. G. Knochel, M. Garmoe, and S. A. 
Shosky. 2007. Interactions and effects of multiple 
biological control insects on diffuse and spotted 
knapweed in the Front Range of Colorado. Biolog-
ical Control 42:345–354.
Sheppard, A. W., M. J. Smyth, and A. Swirepik. 2001. 
The impact of a root-­crown weevil and pasture 
competition on the winter annual Echium plan-
tagineum. Journal of Applied Ecology 38:291–300.
Sheppard, A. W., R. Hill, R. A. DeClerck-Floate, ­A. 
McClay, T. Olckers, P. C. Quimby, Jr., and H. G. 
Zimmermann. 2003. A global review of risk-­
benefit-­cost analysis for the introduction of classi-
cal biological control agents against weeds: a crisis 
in the making? Biocontrol News and Information 
24:91N–108N.
Sheppard, A. W., R. D. van Klinken, and T. A. Heard. 
2005. Scientific advances in the analysis of direct 
risks of weed biological control agents to nontarget 
plants. Biological Control 35:215–226.
Silvertown, J., M. Franco, I. Pisanty, and A. Mendoza. 
1993. Comparative plant demography—relative 
importance of life-­cycle components to the finite 
rate of increase in woody and herbaceous perenni-
als. Journal of Ecology 81:465–476.
Stubben, C., and B. Milligan. 2007. Estimating and ana-
lyzing demographic models using the popbio pack-
age in R. Journal of Statistical Software 22:1–23.
Suckling, D. M. 2013. Benefits from biological control 
of weeds in New Zealand range from negligible to 
massive: a retrospective analysis. Biological Con-
trol 66:27–32.
Suckling, D. M., and R. F. H. Sforza. 2014. What mag-
nitude are observed non-­target impacts from weed 
biocontrol? PLoS ONE 9:1–12.
Tipping, P. W., M. R. Martin, K. R. Nimmo, R. M. 
Pierce, M. D. Smart, E. White, P. T. Madeira, and 
T. D. ­Center. 2009. Invasion of a West Everglades 
wetland by Melaleuca quinquenervia countered 
by classical biological control. Biological Control 
48:73–78.
Trumble, J. T., D. M. Kolodny-Hirsch, and I. P. Ting. 
1993. Plant compensation for arthropod herbivory. 
Annual Review of Entomology 38:93–119.
Upadhyaya, M. K., H. R. Tilsner, and M. D. Pitt. 1988. 
The biology of Canadian weeds. 87. Cynoglossum 
officinale L. Canadian Journal of Plant Science 
68:763–774.
Van Breemen, A. M. M. 1984. Comparative germi-
nation ecology of three short-­lived monocarpic 
­Boraginaceae. Acta Botanica Neerlandica 33: 
283–305.
Van Hezewijk, B. H., R. A. De Clerck-Floate, and J. R. 
Moyer. 2008. Effect of nitrogen on the preference 
and performance of a biological control agent for 
an invasive plant. Biological Control 46:332–340.
Wesselingh, R. A., P. G. L. Klinkhamer, T. J. De Jong, 
and L. A. Boorman. 1997. Threshold size for flow-
ering in different habitats: effects of size-­dependent 
growth and survival. Ecology 78:2118–2132.
Williams, J. L. 2009. Flowering life-­history strategies 
differ between the native and introduced ranges 
of a monocarpic perennial. American Naturalist 
174:660–672.
Williams, J. L., H. Auge, and J. L. Maron. 2010. Testing 
hypotheses for exotic plant success: parallel exper-
iments in the native and introduced ranges. Ecolo-
gy 91:1355–1366.
Supporting Information
Additional Supporting Information may be found online at: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/
ecs2.1280/supinfo 
Data Availability
Data associated with this paper have been deposited in Dryad: http://dx.doi.org/10.5061/dryad.p3fg9        
 21508925, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ecs2.1280 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
