ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Evidence that hepatitis C virus genome partly controls
infection outcome
Matthew Hartﬁeld,1 Rowena Bull,2 Peter A. White,2 Andrew Lloyd,2 Fabio Luciani,2,*
Samuel Alizon1,* and on behalf of the HITS investigators
1 Laboratoire MIVEGEC (UMR CNRS 5290 IRD 224 UM1 UM2), Montpellier Cedex 5, France
2 Infection and Inﬂammation Research Centre, School of Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia
Keywords
hepatitis C virus, IL28B SNPs, infection
simulation, phylogenetic analysis, trait
correlation
Correspondence
Matthew Hartﬁeld, Laboratoire MIVEGEC
(UMR CNRS 5290 IRD 224 UM1 UM2), 911
avenue Agropolis, B.P. 64501, 34394
Montpellier Cedex 5, France.
Tel.: +33 467416268;
fax: +33 467416299;
e-mail: matt.hartﬁeld@gmail.com; samuel.
alizon@cnrs.fr
*These authors contributed equally to this
work.
Received: 4 December 2013
Accepted: 7 January 2014
doi:10.1111/eva.12151
Abstract
Infection by hepatitis C virus (HCV) leads to one of two outcomes; either the
infection resolves within approximately 6 months or the virus can persist indeﬁ-
nitely. Host genetics are known to affect the likelihood of clearance or persis-
tence. By contrast, the importance of the virus genotype in determining infection
outcome is unknown, as quantifying this effect traditionally requires well-charac-
terized
transmission
networks,
which
are
rare.
Extending
phylogenetic
approaches previously developed to estimate the virus control over set-point viral
load in HIV-1 infections, we simulate inheritance of a binary trait along a phylo-
genetic tree, use this data to quantify how infection outcomes cluster and ascer-
tain the effect of virus genotype on these. We apply our method to the Hepatitis
C Incidence and Transmission Study in prisons (HITS-p) data set from Australia,
as this cohort prospectively identiﬁed incident cases including viraemic subjects
who ultimately clear the virus, thus providing us with a unique collection of
sequences from clearing infections. We detect signiﬁcant correlations between
infection outcome and virus distance in the phylogeny for viruses of Genotype 1,
with estimates lying at around 67%. No statistically signiﬁcant estimates were
obtained for viruses of Genotype 3a.
Introduction
The hepatitis C virus (HCV; family Flaviviridae, genus
Hepacivirus) is estimated to infect around 170 million peo-
ple worldwide, and is a major cause of chronic liver disease
(Simmonds 2004). Due to the ensuing health burden
caused by HCV, there is a considerable research focus on
understanding how the host and the virus genetics shape
the infection outcome (Ploss and Dubuisson 2012). There
is also a vast array of new therapies being developed that
target both host (e.g. cyclophilin inhibitors, microRNA an-
tagomirs (Janssen et al. 2013)) and viral phenotypes
(direct-acting antiviral agents targeting the HCV protease
and polymerase; Ploss and Dubuisson 2012).
If untreated, acute HCV infections mostly result in one
of two infection outcomes. Either the virus is eliminated
within 6 months (a ‘cleared’ infection) or it develops into a
‘chronic’ infection that generally persists for life unless
cured by antiviral therapy. Spontaneous clearance can
occur after 6 months, albeit with a very low probability
(much <1% overall; Micallef et al. 2006; Grebely et al.
2012, 2014). Genetic polymorphisms in the promoter
region of the host IL28B gene that correlate with an
increased probability of HCV clearance have been detected
(Ge et al. 2009; Thomas et al. 2009; Rauch et al. 2010). It
is clear that certain regions of the viral polyprotein are tar-
geted by the host immune responses and are therefore
involved in clearance. Speciﬁcally, the envelope (E) region
of the HCV genome harbours a hypervariable region,
which is a target for neutralizing antibody response, which
in turn has been associated with driving viral evolution
(Weiner et al. 1992; Kumar et al. 1993; Faﬁ-Kremer et al.
2010; Liu et al. 2010). There are also multiple epitopes
within the nonstructural (NS) region of the genome that
are targeted by cellular immune response (CD8 cytotoxic T
cells), giving rise to virus escape variants (Kuntzen et al.
© 2014 The Authors. Evolutionary Applications published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided
the original work is properly cited.
533
Evolutionary Applications ISSN 1752-4571
Evolutionary Applications
2007; Osburn et al. 2010). These ﬁndings argue that an
optimal host immune response clears HCV quickly, leading
to a progressive purging of virus variants during acute
infection. It is currently unclear to what extent strains iso-
lated from cleared or chronic infections differ in their evo-
lutionary dynamics. Farci et al. (2000) found that HCV
strains detected during the chronic phase tend to have
higher genetic diversity in the E region compared with
strains detected in subjects who cleared the infection, lead-
ing to clustering of similar infection outcomes along a phy-
logeny. However, a recent study (Liu et al. 2012) observed
the opposite result, with clearing strains exhibiting higher
evolutionary rates in the E2-HVR1 region than chronic
strains.
Hepatitis C virus is divided into six major genotypes (1–
6) and several closely related subtypes (for example, 1a or
1b) that differ approximately by 30% in nucleotide and
amino acid sequences (Simmonds et al. 2005). The six
genotypes vary in predominance and are dependent upon
geographical location (Simmonds et al. 2005). For exam-
ple, Genotype 1 is most prevalent in the USA and Europe,
while Genotype 3 is more common in Asia and South
America, and Australia has both genotypes 1 and 3. There
also exist epidemiological differences between the geno-
types, with Pybus et al. (2001) showing that the 1a and 1b
subtypes of HCV spread faster than others.
Overall, it appears likely that speciﬁc HCV infection out-
comes result from the interlinked effects of the individual
virus genome, host genetics and immune response status.
However, the relative effects of all of these factors, espe-
cially virus genetics, are poorly known. It is hard to investi-
gate the relative impact of each of these effects, especially
the impact of genetically similar transmitted viruses, as
acute infection is predominantly asymptomatic and the
incubation period may be up to several months. Hence, the
transmission
chain
is
typically
poorly
characterized.
Recently, phylogenetic methods have been used to deter-
mine the effect of a virus genome on the value of infection
traits, such as viral load. The power of these methods lies in
the fact that a phylogeny built on the sequences from
viruses sampled from different individuals can approximate
the transmission network between these hosts (Leitner
et al. 1996; Hue et al. 2004). Even though this was only an
approximation of the real transmission network, Alizon
et al. (2010) were able to show using phylogenetic compar-
ative methods that up to 59% of the set-point viral load in
HIV infections was attributable to virus genetics effects;
this estimate is higher than some estimates obtained from
known transmission pairs (Tang et al. 2004; Hollingsworth
et al. 2010), but consistent with others (Hecht et al. 2010).
In general, phylogenetic methods have been of consider-
able use in elucidating the epidemiological history of HCV
infections. By estimating the population size of an HCV
epidemic in Egypt, it was shown that the outbreak coin-
cided
with
mass
parenteral
antischistosomal
therapy
(Pybus et al. 2003; Drummond et al. 2005; Stadler et al.
2013), validating earlier epidemiological evidence (Frank
et al. 2000). Similarly, a phylogenetic analysis of the
recombinant HCV form 2k/1b suggests that this variant
has spread via infected blood transfusions in the former
Soviet Union (Raghwani et al. 2012). However, there is
very
little
work
using
the
phylogenetic
comparative
approach to determine the genetic effects of the infection
itself.
Here, we extend the methods used in Alizon et al. (2010)
to HCV, to measure the degree of clustering of discrete
infection outcomes along a phylogeny. We describe a
method to measure the virus control over the infection
outcome for genetically similar HCV strains, which also
accounts for phylogenetic and transmission uncertainty.
Our virus control value is analogous to heritability in quan-
titative genetics (Visscher et al. 2008) but applied to cate-
gorical traits. That is, the control value measures to what
degree a virus genotype inﬂuences the probability that a
speciﬁc infection outcome will be cleared or not, and also
that this trait is passed on to its recipient. Our method
functions by simulating a set of phylogeny tips (each of
which corresponds to an infection outcome) by assuming
different virus effects on trait outcomes. We then compare
the tip distribution we observe with real data to the simu-
lated tipset, to determine whether there is a virus effect on
infection outcome. We additionally describe how the
method can take into account confounding effects such as
host genetics. These ﬁndings have applications in elucidat-
ing the causes of an HCV infection outcome, as well as pro-
viding evolutionary insights as to the selective forces
behind speciﬁc infection outcomes.
Materials and methods
Ethics statement
Ethical approval was obtained from Human Research Eth-
ics Committees of Justice Health (reference number GEN
31/05), New South Wales Department of Corrective Ser-
vices (reference number 05/0884) and the University of
New South Wales (reference number 05094), all located in
Sydney, Australia. The project was approved by the relevant
institutional review boards. All subjects provided written
informed consent.
Subjects analysed in study
Hepatitis C virus genome data used in this study were
obtained as part of the Australian ‘Hepatitis C Incidence
and Transmission Study in prisons (HITS-p) cohort
534
© 2014 The Authors. Evolutionary Applications published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 7 (2014) 533–547
Virus effect of hepatitis C infection
Hartﬁeld et al.
 17524571, 2014, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/eva.12151 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
(Dolan et al. 2010; Teutsch et al. 2010). From September
2005 to May 2009, adult prison inmates were recruited at
19 of 30 correctional centres housing adult male or females
in New South Wales (NSW). The conditions to join the
study were to report a lifetime history of injecting drug use
(IDU); to be imprisoned within the last 12 months; and to
have a serological test documenting negative anti-HCV
antibody status during that time. Of the 500 subjects
enrolled in HITS-p, this analysis included subjects who
were HCV-RNA negative at enrolment and had completed
at least one prospective follow-up visit while in prison
(having either been continuously imprisoned or visited
upon re-imprisonment after a period of release). A venous
blood sample was collected at each interview to screen for
HCV antibodies and viraemia (HCV-RNA test), as previ-
ously described (Dolan et al. 2010). The average follow-up
time between two consecutive interviews was 6 months.
Natural viral clearance was deﬁned as two RNA-negative
tests, while antibody-positive status in the subsequent
12 months following the last HCV-RNA-positive test.
Within the HITS-p cohort, 134 subjects were found HCV
antibody-positive, 94 at baseline and the remaining during
the 5 years follow-up period.
Generally, it is hard to obtain virus sequences from sub-
jects who ultimately cleared the infection, as the acute
phase of the infection is typically asymptomatic. The HITS
cohort therefore provides a unique opportunity for blood
sampling in the acute phase, allowing detection of early vi-
raemia in clearing infections. The number of sequences
from clearing infections used in this study is therefore one
of the highest number to have been analysed. There are
only a limited number of publications reporting viral
sequences and known disease outcome, including a similar
number of clearers (Kasprowicz et al. 2010; Liu et al.
2012). However, these studies have not provided a large
cohort of HCV-infected subjects with a closely related
transmission network. Rather, these studies match case
control samples for speciﬁc analyses, which are unsuitable
for the measurement of phylogenetic relatedness between
viral sequences. The HITS-p cohort is a prospective cohort
of individuals infected with the same transmission route in
closed setting. Hence, it is likely that the IDUs sampled in
this cohort are infected by related viruses, which is though
to improve the accuracy of phylogenetic models to approx-
imate the transmission network. HITS-p also collects sub-
stantial risk behaviour data on each enrolled individual at
each time point, as well as their genotype at the IL28B loci.
Sequences of E1-HVR1
The region encoding the last 171 bp of core, E1 and HVR1
(882 bp; nucleotides 723–1604, with reference to HCV
strain H77; GenBank accession number AF009606) was
ampliﬁed by nested RT-PCR as previously described (Pham
et al. 2010). In brief, viral RNA was extracted from 140 lL
of plasma using the QIAmp Viral RNA kit according to
manufacturers’ instructions (Qiagen, Venlo, Limburg, the
Netherlands). Five microlitres of extracted RNA was added
to a 15 lL reaction mixture containing 10 lL of RT-PCR
reaction mix (iScript One-Step RT-PCR with SYBR Green;
Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA), 500 nM of each primer
(GV32 and GV33 in Pham et al. (2010)) and 0.4 lL of 50x
iScript reverse-transcriptase enzyme (Bio-Rad). Cycling
conditions included a 10-min reverse transcription step at
50°C; reverse-transcription inactivation at 95°C for 5 min;
15 cycles at 95°C for 30 s, 55°C for 30 s and 72°C for
1 min, followed by a ﬁnal extension of 72°C for 7 min.
The second-round PCR was prepared by adding 2 lL of
ﬁrst-round product to 18 lL of reaction mix containing iQ
SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-Rad) and 500 nM of each pri-
mer (GV34 and GV35/GV36). The second-round cycling
conditions included 95°C for 5 min and 40 cycles of 95°C
for 30 s, 60°C for 30 s and 72°C for 1 min. The ampliﬁed
products were identiﬁed by agarose gel electrophoresis.
PCR products were puriﬁed and sequenced directly on an
ABI 3730 DNA Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Carlsbad,
CA, USA) using dye-terminator chemistry.
Initial analysis of HCV genetic data
Sequences of the E1-HVR1 region of the HCV genome
were available for 92 subjects infected with genotype 1a, 1b
or 3a viruses. Of these, 19 were from subjects who ulti-
mately naturally cleared the HCV infection (sequencing
was difﬁcult in clearing infections due to lower viral loads).
For the study, we only used the earliest-obtained HCV
sequence for each patient and discarded subsequent
sequences. Preliminary analysis showed that within-host
evolution contributed minimally to the phylogenetic relat-
edness between subjects, as all the longitudinal samples
present in the cohort clustered with the subject itself (result
not shown). Due to some incomplete sequencing, subse-
quent phylogenies were built using a 657 bp length of
sequence, covering the core and E1 regions. Although Gray
et al. (2011) found that this segment was hypervariable
within hosts, they also showed that it evolved at a similar
rate to the rest of the genome at the between-host level, so
phylogenies should not reﬂect within-host selection at this
segment.
We performed an initial analysis on the complete data
set. However, to prevent confounding of any detected
genetic signal with the HCV genotype, we subsequently
extracted the genotypes from the two major observed sub-
types and performed analysis on these separate data sets,
which we denoted as ‘Genotype 1’ (containing viruses of
subtype 1a and 1b) and ‘Genotype 3’ (subtype 3a; Fig. 1).
© 2014 The Authors. Evolutionary Applications published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 7 (2014) 533–547
535
Hartﬁeld et al.
Virus effect of hepatitis C infection
 17524571, 2014, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/eva.12151 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
The application of these selection criteria resulted in 31
subjects in the Genotype 1, and 42 subjects in the Genotype
3 category with conﬁrmed sequences amenable for further
analyses. We decided to combine sequences of subtype 1a
and 1b into the same data set, given their similarity and
also because we did not ﬁnd signiﬁcant association of acute
infections with subtype (P = 0.0619, Fisher’s exact test).
Creation of phylogenetic trees
For each data set, we used BEAST v1.7.3 (Drummond et al.
2012) to create a set of phylogenetic trees for use in our
Bayesian analysis, to account for sampling error in the phy-
logeny. As the inference of phylogenetic signal for a trait
can be very sensitive to the underlying phylogeny, then by
sampling from the posterior distribution and performing
the analysis over several trees, we minimized the inﬂuence
that phylogenetic sensitivity had on the ﬁnal result (Parker
et al. 2008). The collection date of the HCV sample, as
obtained from the HITS-p cohort, was used to align tree
tips. Using the JMODELTEST software (Guindon and Gascuel
2003; Darriba et al. 2012), it was found that a GTR nucleo-
tide model with estimated base frequencies, invariable sites
and a Gamma site heterogeneity model with four categories
(GTR + I + Γ) gave the lowest Bayesian information crite-
rion (BIC) score.
We estimated phylogenies by comparing outputs consist-
ing of a constant population size coalescent model; expo-
nential population growth; or a Bayesian Skyline model
with 10 groups. Using the Path-O-Gen software (version
1.4, available from http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/patho-
gen/), we did not ﬁnd a positive correlation between the
sampling date and root-to-tip divergence for either sub-
type. Both estimates were not signiﬁcantly different from
zero (correlation coefﬁcient for Genotype 1 was 0.220,
P = 0.398; for Genotype 3, it was 0.0863, P = 0.600).
Therefore, it appeared that no molecular clock signal is
present in the data. We therefore proceeded using a strict
clock model as the simplest possible scenario and checked
afterwards that the estimated substitution rates were in line
with previous ﬁndings for HCV. The outputs seemed to
make sense, as substitution rate estimates that we found
lied around 103, as found by Gray et al. (2011). The log-
likelihoods of the exponential model and the Bayesian Sky-
line models were not signiﬁcantly different when individu-
ally compared with the constant-size model, as inferred
(A)
(B)
Figure 1 Phylogenies of the two HCV data sets. ‘Genotype 1’ (part A) consisted of viruses of subtype 1a or 1b, as denoted on the graph. ‘Genotype
3’ (part B) consisted of viruses of subtype 3a. Short-term acute outcomes are denoted with an A, chronic outcomes with a C. Grey labels indicate
strains where the host had the homozygous IL28B-917 SNP corresponding to increased clearance rate. A scale bar is also included that shows the
number of substitutions per site. Phylogenies were compiled for this ﬁgure using PhyML (Guindon et al. 2010), with a GTR model, gamma-distributed
site heterogeneity, empirical nucleotide frequencies and invariable sites. See main text for further details.
536
© 2014 The Authors. Evolutionary Applications published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 7 (2014) 533–547
Virus effect of hepatitis C infection
Hartﬁeld et al.
 17524571, 2014, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/eva.12151 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
using a likelihood ratio test. Therefore, we used the outputs
from the constant-size coalescent population model for
subsequent analyses.
There could be a concern that since we sampled from a
densely infected population, then using a coalescent model
would provide a skewed phylogeny with branches that are
more closely related than they actually are. As a precaution,
we also produced phylogenies using a birth–death model,
as opposed to a coalescent model (Stadler et al. 2012). We
will compare results obtained from different methods
where necessary; however, we generally found the same
quantitative results as those obtained from a coalescent
tree.
We set each MCMC to run for 109 iterations, with
parameters logged every 100 000 runs. Each parameter in
the MCMC analysis exceeded an effective sampling size of
600.
Generating simulation data of categorical trait control
In this study, we were interested in estimating how likely it
is for a binary trait, such as infection outcome, to be corre-
lated between related virus strains. There currently exists
several Bayesian methods to infer genetic relatedness
between different tip outcomes from a phylogenetic tree
[summarized in Parker et al. (2008)]. While these methods
can infer the likelihood of whether a trait is clustered in a
phylogeny, they cannot currently quantify the degree to
which categorical infection traits are ‘inherited’ by the
infection recipient, as well as account for confounding fac-
tors. Theoretically, if a trait of interest is more likely to be
‘inherited’ from one infection to the next, then it should
cluster around speciﬁc tips in the tree. To this end, we con-
structed a method to simulate inheritance of a trait along
the phylogeny, and then link these predicted outcomes to
existing statistics that determine the correlation between
tip outcomes and phylogenetic distance.
A schematic of these simulations is shown in Fig. 2. For
the simulations, we chose 500 trees at random from the
posterior distribution as produced by the BEAST analysis for
a certain genotype, to make the simulations tractable. For
each of these trees, we randomly simulated the trait values
for the tree, based on 20 different correlation values
(denoted c) that were chosen from a uniform distribution
between 0 and 1. A value of c = 0 means that there is no
trait correlation between related strains, so daughter infec-
tions are assigned a trait value at random. On the other
hand, a value of c = 1 means that the ‘offspring’ of an
infection caused by a speciﬁc strain is certain to retain the
same outcome as its ‘parent’ infection. For each of these 20
chosen values of c, we started by either assigning the trait of
interest (such as HCV infections that clear rapidly) to the
root with probability p, where p is the observed frequency
of the trait in the actual data set or the alternative trait
(such as chronic HCV infection) with probability 1–p.
From this tip, we went through each node of the tree in
turn. At each new node, we assigned a trait to this node.
This trait is either that of its ancestor with control proba-
bility c. With probability 1 – c, the outcome is unrelated to
its ancestor, so instead the trait was chosen from a Ber-
noulli distribution with mean p (that was observed in the
real data) and subsequently assigned to the node. For each
branch, we repeated this process for generations, which
were chosen from the following distribution:
g = 1 + Poisson (L/Tg)
Here, L is the length of the branch between a parent and
daughter node in years, and Tg the average length of infec-
tion, which was set to 3 years, as based on estimates using
surveillance data and molecular sequences (Magiorkinis
et al. 2013). Therefore, at least one generation was assumed
per branch, along with an estimated number of subsequent
transmissions that were not captured by the existing phy-
logeny (Shirreff et al. 2013). This process was repeated
until all nodes had been assigned values, including all tree
tips. Simulations were executed using R (R Development
Core Team 2008).
After we simulated infection outcomes, we calculated the
associated clustering statistics for a simulated outcome. To
(A)
(B)
Figure 2 Schematic of the virus control simulations. The root has an
initial state assigned to it; this state is certainly passed on to one of the
offspring genotypes with probability c (case A), or is not passed on with
probability 1 – c (case B). In this latter case, the offspring state is
assigned a value drawn from a Bernoulli trial, where p is the observed
frequency of the trait of interest from the data set.
© 2014 The Authors. Evolutionary Applications published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 7 (2014) 533–547
537
Hartﬁeld et al.
Virus effect of hepatitis C infection
 17524571, 2014, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/eva.12151 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
achieve this, we used the ‘ace’ function, provided as part of
the ‘ape’ package (Analyses of Phylogenetics and Evolu-
tion) for R (Paradis et al. 2004). This function implements
Pagel’s maximum-likelihood method (Pagel 1994) for esti-
mating the rate of correlated evolution between several dis-
crete traits along a phylogeny. It does so by estimating the
transition probabilities q0,1 and q1,0 between the two traits;
the probability that a ‘clearer’ genotype will switch to being
a chronic genotype, and vice versa. There are two probabili-
ties because it can be easier to switch from one state to the
other, hence, q0,1 is not necessarily equal to q1,0. After esti-
mating these transition probabilities, the inputted control
value was saved, along with estimates of the switching rates
(with standard errors) and the log-likelihood for the esti-
mates. Note that in order for the analysis to proceed, there
needed to be heterogeneity in trait outcomes. That is, there
has to be at least one tip of each category present at the end
of the simulation, to cause transitions between the two
traits. If all the simulated tips were of one type only, we
artiﬁcially introduced an outcome of the opposite type at a
random tip on the phylogeny.
Overall, we ended up with 500 trees 9 20 trait control
values = 10 000 simulated outcomes for each genotype of
interest. Generally, the ﬁnal outcome corresponded well
with actual data; with simulations along the Genotype 1
coalescent phylogeny, the average ﬁnal number of clearers
equalled 6.99, which was not signiﬁcantly different from
the true value of 7 (two-sided t = 0.298, P = 0.766). The
total number of clearers appeared to ﬂuctuate around 7 for
most correlation values, but if the correlation value used as
an input approached 1, then this total number could reach
high values (so all tips would be assigned the infrequent
trait), or more likely to go to zero. This behaviour is due to
the ﬁnal trait allocations being more likely to reﬂect the ini-
tial state assigned to the tree root (Fig. S1A). After remov-
ing extremely high outlier values (those that lie outside the
97.5% upper quartile), the estimated switching rates were
found to be signiﬁcantly negatively correlated with the
input trait correlation values (for q1,0, F1,9748 = 135.7,
P < 2.2 9 10–16; for q0,1, F1,9748 = 177.4, P < 2.2 9 10–16;
see also Fig. S1B,C). This supported our intuition that with
high levels of virus control on trait outcomes, similar out-
comes tended to congregate around closely related tips.
These results were quantitatively similar for the Genotype 3
data set, and also to results produced using a birth–death
phylogeny.
Using simulation data to quantify virus control over traits
To estimate the control of the HCV virus genotype over
the infection trait, we estimated the switching rates for the
true data set, for 200 trees sampled from the BEAST analysis.
This gave us a range of true switching rates for the actual
data. These transition values are important in their own
right, as they notify to what degree infection outcomes
cluster on the phylogeny. Yet they are different from the
main quantity of interest, which is the extent to which the
trait is controlled by the virus. Therefore, using these esti-
mates, we then selected simulation data that jointly gener-
ated the same switching rates and then obtained the
associated correlation values that were used to generate
these same values (Fig. 3). This methodology shares many
similarities with the Approximate Bayesian Computing
(ABC) approach. In both cases, we ﬁrst simulate many
response values (here, the switching rates and log-likeli-
hoods) using many sets of input values (here the virus con-
trol values), and then, when we observe such response
values in nature, work our way back to infer what the input
values are. One difference though is that in ABC the preci-
sion has to be set, whereas here we use the quantiles of the
real data to generate the conﬁdence intervals for our esti-
mated data.
To test for signiﬁcance, we randomized the tips 1000
times and obtained the estimated control value for each
random tipset. We denoted a control value as being signiﬁ-
cant if more than 95% of the randomizations were lower
than the true value, as randomization should break up
associations between tips, thereby decreasing the expected
virus control over the trait. The fact that signiﬁcance was
determined using maximum-likelihood estimates of the
switching rates meant that these values were optimized
based on the underlying phylogenetic tree. Therefore, the
randomization procedure tested for clustering between
Figure 3 Schematic showing how to estimate virus control c from sim-
ulation data. After estimating the switching rate (q1,0) from the true
data set (y-axis), the simulation points are found that also lie within this
range (grey horizontal lines). The associated control values are then
found from these points, so the median virus control value is then
obtained along with conﬁdence interval limits (black lines on the x-axis).
Note that for this ﬁgure, we only plot a sample of all points on a log
scale for clarity of presentation.
538
© 2014 The Authors. Evolutionary Applications published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 7 (2014) 533–547
Virus effect of hepatitis C infection
Hartﬁeld et al.
 17524571, 2014, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/eva.12151 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
similar traits, while accounting for potential confounding
effects of the tree size and shape.
Testing for virus control over infection outcome while
conditioning on host’s IL28B status
Estimates of infection outcome correlation could have been
confounded by the presence of SNPs at the IL28B locus that
correlate with increased clearance rate. In these cases, we
wanted to obtain estimates of the trait correlation while
accounting for external factors. To achieve this, we calcu-
lated switching rates and log-likelihood values using the
BAYESTRAITS package (available from www.evolution.rdg.ac.uk),
which executes the maximum-likelihood analysis of Pagel
(1994) while accounting for secondary traits that can affect
the evolution of the main trait. We ﬁrst checked that the
same results as the ‘ace’ package for R were obtained for
the switching rates if we only investigate one trait, which
they did. BayesTraits can thus be used to calculate the esti-
mated transition rates of infection outcome, given that
there is a possible covariation with the host’s IL28B genetic
status.
From these estimates, we recalculated the estimated virus
control over the trait, given the new transition probabili-
ties, from the simulation data as outlined above. We then
tested for signiﬁcance by randomizing the tips 1000 times,
while ensuring that the infection outcome and host IL28B
factor for a speciﬁc tip remain linked together. Trait corre-
lation estimates were then recalculated for each of these
1000 new tip sets and tested for signiﬁcance as before.
Results
Correlation between virus genomes and infection outcome
for all genome sequences
Genetic data obtained from the HITS-p cohort mostly
resolved itself into one of the two clades, speciﬁcally HCV
genotypes 1 (including subtypes 1a and 1b), and subtype 3a
(Fig. 1). These data sets are labelled as ‘Genotype 1’ and
‘Genotype 3’, respectively. As a ﬁrst test of our method, we
investigated whether we could detect evidence of virus con-
trol over infection outcome for both genotypes analysed
together (a joint phylogeny is shown in Fig. S2). Results are
presented in Fig. 4A, which shows that a fairly high level of
virus control was observed (0.63), which was signiﬁcant
(P = 0.044 following a randomization test). A lower value
(0.59) was observed for the birth–death model, which was
also marginally signiﬁcant (P = 0.046; Fig. S3A).
The high level of virus control found for randomized tips
likely reﬂects that, although the log-likelihood of the
switching rates decreases with increased virus control, the
likelihood surface can be ﬂat for a broad range of control
values. This effect can reduce the power of the method to
detect low levels of signal (see Fig. S1D for log-likelihood
values obtained over the Genotype 1 phylogeny). We will
investigate the power further in the section ‘Power calcula-
tions and analysis of simulated data’.
For this ﬁrst analysis, it was assumed that infection out-
comes change independently of other factors. This is not
quite true, as there are known host polymorphisms that
can affect infection outcome. If these host effects cluster on
the virus phylogeny, then this host clustering may mask
any virus signal that would otherwise be expressed. There-
fore, we next investigated the phylogenetic signal of host
genetic effects.
Phylogenetic signal for host’s IL28B status
It is known that several polymorphisms near the IL28B
gene in humans correlate with increased clearance rate
of acute HCV infection. Those with a homozygous C/C
mutation at the rs12979860 SNP (hereafter IL28B-860)
are much more likely to achieve clearance (Ge et al.
2009; Thomas et al. 2009; Tillmann et al. 2010). Simi-
larly, those with a T/T genotype at the rs8099917 SNP
(hereafter IL28B-917) are more likely to clear the virus
(Rauch et al. 2010).
In theory, as these mutations are present in the host gen-
ome and not the virus, and we were analysing virus phylog-
enies, we should not have detected phylogenetic signal for
the host’s IL28B status. We therefore controlled whether
there was evidence of clustering for speciﬁc IL28B geno-
types on the virus phylogeny, as a clustering of host traits
could have masked expression of virus control on infection
outcome clustering.
Figure 4B,C outlines results when using the SNP that
maximized clearance rates for HCV (C/C for IL28B-860;
T/T for IL28B-917) as the trait of interest instead of the
chronic/clearer outcomes. No signiﬁcant correlations were
obtained, although p values tended to be close to signiﬁ-
cance for the IL28B-917 SNP (Fig. 4C; phylogenetic signal
value = 0.646; P = 0.054). Results were quantitatively simi-
lar if using a birth–death phylogeny (Fig. S3B,C).
The near-signiﬁcant result for IL28B-917 SNP highlights
a possibility of nonrandom clustering of host genetic effects
on the phylogeny, which could have affected our previous
analysis on infection outcome status.
Correlation in infection outcome, accounting for host
status
As there could have been potential confounding effect from
the host in determining potential inﬂuence of the virus
control on infection outcome, we repeated the ﬁrst analysis
while accounting for the host’s IL28B status. To this end,
© 2014 The Authors. Evolutionary Applications published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 7 (2014) 533–547
539
Hartﬁeld et al.
Virus effect of hepatitis C infection
 17524571, 2014, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/eva.12151 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
we used BAYESTRAITS (available from www.evolution.rdg.ac.uk)
to recalculate estimated transitions rates of the infection
outcome, given that they could be affected by a secondary
trait (in this case, the host’s IL28B-917 genotype). We did
not investigate the effect of IL28B-860 SNP as a co-factor as
we did not ﬁnd nearly signiﬁcant evidence of this trait clus-
tering on any of the phylogenies. This second analysis
essentially removed the variance in infection outcomes
solely caused by host differences and focused on the virus
control on the residual variance. We then used these new
rates to calculate estimates of virus control from the simu-
lated data set of infection outcomes.
The results from the repeated analysis are outlined in
Fig. 4D. A signiﬁcant (P = 0.015) and high virus control
value of 0.87 was obtained if infection outcome covaried
with the IL28B-917 SNP. The control value obtained using
the birth–death phylogeny was slightly lower (0.84) but
remained strongly signiﬁcant (Fig. S3D).
This initial analysis demonstrates how, over our entire
data set, there appears to be a strong effect of the virus
(A)
(C)
(D)
(B)
Figure 4 Estimate of control signal for a single trait, based on a coalescent phylogeny for all sequences. Control signal estimates as inferred from the
actual data set of interest (black), and of the 1000 median values of virus control estimates obtained from randomized tipsets (grey). P values listed
above each pair of box plots show signiﬁcancy of true control value based on randomization test; bold values indicate P < 0.05. Data analysed were
the infection outcome (A); the status of the IL28B-860 SNP (B) or IL28B-917 SNP (C); or the the infection outcome covarying with the IL28B-917 SNP
(D).
540
© 2014 The Authors. Evolutionary Applications published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 7 (2014) 533–547
Virus effect of hepatitis C infection
Hartﬁeld et al.
 17524571, 2014, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/eva.12151 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
genotype on infection outcome, especially after correcting
for host genotype. However, this analysis does not deter-
mine whether this signal is driven by effects of one speciﬁc
genotype. This could be true if the genotypes respond dif-
ferently to treatment (Lauer and Walker 2001). In addition,
it could be argued that the high level of phylogenetic signal
was instead caused by the large phylogenetic distance
between the two genotype clades (Fig. S2). There may also
be uncertainty about whether the two subclades are from
different transmission networks. To this end, we subse-
quently repeated this analysis but on the separate Genotype
1 and Genotype 3 data sets.
Separate analysis of genotypes
For this analysis, we ﬁrst tested whether a model that
had different transition rates for each clade provided a
better ﬁt than one using the same transition rates for
each subclade. Initially, we compared four switching rates
(different q0,1 and q1,0 values for the Genotype 1 and 3
subclades), as opposed to two rates (same q0,1 and q1,0
for each subclade). We found that the four-rate model
provided a better ﬁt, as determined by a lower BIC value,
irrespective of whether we used a coalescent or a birth–
death phylogeny (data not shown). This result reﬂects
the large phylogenetic distance between Genotype 1 and
3 clades (Fig. S2).
We next investigated whether we could detect evidence
of a signiﬁcant level of virus control over infection out-
come for the two data sets of interest. The results of our
analysis are presented for Genotype 1 (Fig. 5A) and Geno-
type 3 (Fig. 6A). For Genotype 1, a signiﬁcantly high con-
trol value of 0.67 was obtained (P = 0.012). However, for
Genotype 3, a close but nonsigniﬁcant value of 0.573
(P = 0.099) was found. Phylogenetic signal for the birth–
death phylogeny remained signiﬁcant for Genotype 1 (Figs
S4A and S5A).
It was then determined whether there was any potential
clustering of host genotypes along these subclades (Fig. 5B,
C for Genotype 1; Fig. 6B,C for Genotype 3). As for the
complete data set, we did not obtain any signiﬁcant results
(Fig. 5C; see also Fig. 1 to see clustering of the IL28B-917
SNP on the phylogenies).
Note that the degree of observed clustering does not say
anything about the correlation between the infection out-
come and the IL28B SNP. It instead measures whether
more related viruses tend to be found in similar host types.
One possible reason for signal could be due to selection
acting on the hypervariable segment within hosts during
infection. To test for this effect, we repeated the analysis
with phylogenies built using third codon positions only,
which should be largely (but not completely) free from
selection. This analysis produced essentially the same esti-
mates of phylogenetic signal as found using a phylogeny
built using the whole genetic region (Table S1). Therefore,
host clustering does not seem to arise due to selection act-
ing on the hypervariable segment. We will come back to
the phenomena of host clustering in further detail in the
Discussion.
Finally, we investigated the phylogenetic signal for infec-
tion outcome over each subclade, as it covaried with the
IL28B-917 SNP (Fig. 5D for Genotype 1, 6D for Genotype
3). We found a signiﬁcant virus control value of 0.63 for
Genotype 1; this estimate was not signiﬁcantly different
from the value obtained without correcting for host effects
(two-sided t = 1.66, P = 0.0961). However, despite a
higher control value being obtained for Genotype 3 than
before (0.64), it was nonsigniﬁcant following the randomi-
zation test. The estimated control value using the birth–
death phylogeny was higher for Genotype 1 (0.69) and
remained signiﬁcant. Although a similarly high value was
found for the Genotype 3 birth–death phylogeny (0.66), it
was not signiﬁcant due to the high estimates obtained from
randomized tips (Figs S4D and S5D).
Overall, this analysis suggests that the phylogenetic signal
obtained for the complete data set was strongly driven by
viruses of Genotype 1. After correcting for IL28B status, the
Genotype 1 estimate was lower than that for the total data
set (0.63, compared with 0.87 for all data), implying that
the level of virus control could have been inﬂated when we
pooled all samples due to the extra phylogenetic structure
caused. We further investigated this result using power
simulations, to verify that our estimates for Genotype 1 are
accurate.
Power calculations and analysis of simulated data
In the previous analysis, one of the more glaring outcomes
is that even randomized tips gave rather high estimates of
virus control, lying at around 40%. The randomization test
determined that our data from Genotype 1 showed evi-
dence of phylogenetic signal compared with randomized
tips, but the question remained as to whether the magni-
tude of the estimates of virus control we obtained are
meaningful.
To determine the accuracy and the potential power of
our method, we simulated 100 different tip outcomes along
the Genotype 1 phylogeny, for a known virus control value
(c), with each outcome produced along a separate tree from
the posterior distribution. We then used our method to
estimate the level of virus control from these simulated
data sets as before, except that we tested for signiﬁcance
using 100 randomized tips as these tests were computation-
ally intensive.
Figure 7 shows the results of this analysis. We see that
as the level of simulated virus control c increases, the
© 2014 The Authors. Evolutionary Applications published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 7 (2014) 533–547
541
Hartﬁeld et al.
Virus effect of hepatitis C infection
 17524571, 2014, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/eva.12151 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
number of signiﬁcant runs, and thus the power of the
method, also increases. However, the power is generally
quite low (ranging from 2/100 runs being signiﬁcant if
simulated c equals 0.55, to 17/100 if c = 0.85). In addition,
the estimated level of virus control from the signiﬁcant
estimates increases with the input value (the slope of the
linear ﬁt is 0.35). Although error estimates are quite large
for inputted c = 0.55, we see that the estimated values are
fairly accurate in estimating the actual input by comparing
mean points to the y = x line. However, if the input value
is very large, then the control value is underestimated
(when we set c = 0.85, the estimated level of phylogenetic
signal is 0.73).
Overall, these power simulations showed that given a
result is signiﬁcant, the obtained estimate of virus control
is likely to lie close to the actual level of phylogenetic signal
that is present. However, this method also shows that our
method can be prone to noisy estimates, which reduced the
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
Figure 5 Estimate of control signal for a single trait, based on a coalescent phylogeny, for sequences from Genotype 1. Control signal estimates as
inferred from the actual data set of interest (black), and of the 1000 median values of virus control estimates obtained from randomized tipsets
(grey). P values listed above each pair of box plots show signiﬁcancy of true control value based on randomization test; bold values indicate P < 0.05.
Data analysed were the infection outcome (A); the status of the IL28B-860 SNP (B) or IL28B-917 SNP (C); or the the infection outcome covarying with
the IL28B-917 SNP (D).
542
© 2014 The Authors. Evolutionary Applications published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 7 (2014) 533–547
Virus effect of hepatitis C infection
Hartﬁeld et al.
 17524571, 2014, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/eva.12151 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
power of the analysis. This result makes clear the need for
future work to increase the precision of phylogenetic infer-
ence (Shirreff et al. 2013).
Discussion
While there are known host factors that can determine the
infection outcome of an HCV infection (Ge et al. 2009;
Thomas et al. 2009; Rauch et al. 2010; Tillmann et al.
2010), there currently exists very little information on how
virus genetics affect the infection outcome. Using a phylo-
genetic method combined with data from an Australian
prisoner cohort, we showed that diversity in the virus geno-
type could partly explain diversity in the infection out-
come.
In our initial analysis, we detected a high level of phylo-
genetic signal once correcting for the host’s IL28B-917
SNP, indicating that a virus genomic effect could be pres-
ent (Fig. 4). We then analysed each subclade separately as
the high signal level could have been caused by general dif-
(B)
(A)
(C)
(D)
Figure 6 As Fig. 5, but with sequences from Genotype 3.
© 2014 The Authors. Evolutionary Applications published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 7 (2014) 533–547
543
Hartﬁeld et al.
Virus effect of hepatitis C infection
 17524571, 2014, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/eva.12151 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
ferences between genotypes. When investigating only the
phylogenetic distance correlation between virus sequences
and infection outcomes, we found a signiﬁcant signal for
Genotype 1 (Fig. 5A) but not for Genotype 3 (albeit our
result was close to signiﬁcance; Fig. 6A). We then repeated
this analysis while accounting for the host’s IL28B genotype
as a co-factor to explain non-IL28B clearance effects and
found that the virus control value equalled 0.63 for Geno-
type 1 (Fig. 5D), which was not statistically different to the
estimate without the correction (0.68).
Therefore, our analyses suggest that for Genotype 1 of
HCV, a substantial component of clearance that is not due
to the IL28B genotype is likely to be explained by the simi-
larity of viral sequences infecting the host. However, we did
not detect a signiﬁcant effect for Genotype 3. The most par-
simonious explanation for not detecting signal is probably
that it is too weak to be picked up by the current method:
our power calculations suggest that the signal has to lie at
about 50% to be detected (see also Shirreff et al. (2013)).
In addition, the coalescent effective population size is much
higher for Genotype 3 (~223 for Genotype 1, compared to
~1398 for Genotype 3), suggesting that this clade has been
undersampled so as to lose phylogenetic signal. The addi-
tion of more sequences could therefore help to detect sig-
niﬁcant signal for Genotype 3.
While the clustering of infection outcomes suggests that
there is an effect of virus genetics on infection outcome for
Genotype 1, caution should be taken in interpreting the
magnitude of these estimates as phylogenetic signal could
also arise due to the action of an unknown co-variate that
has an effect on virus persistence, such as age or gender.
Additionally, it could be argued that infection outcomes
cluster due the effect of a different disease that is co-trans-
mitted with HCV. With the HITS-p cohort, the over-
whelming
majority
of
transmissions
are
caused
via
contaminated injecting or tattooing equipment (Dolan
et al. 2010; Teutsch et al. 2010), so co-transmission of
other pathogens is unlikely. This is because other blood-
borne pathogens that could be transmitted, notably HIV
and Hepatitis B, are present at low frequencies in the pris-
ons (<1% for HIV and 5% for HBV). Furthermore, entry
into the cohort is only permissible to those not already
infected by HIV, so outcome clustering is not due to the
effect of HIV co-transmission.
Host clustering on a virus phylogeny
An important discussion point is why we detected relatively
high and near-signiﬁcant rates of correlation amongst the
host IL28B genotypes when we pooled all the data, as theo-
retically there should not have been any magnitude of host
genetic outcomes clustering along the phylogeny, which
was built based using virus genotypes only. One explana-
tion is that host clustering arose due to a quirk of host sam-
pling, if hosts were genetically related (for example, if they
were twins) and also shared the same transmission history.
In this regard, no known ﬁrst-degree relatives were enrolled
in the cohort, so this type of sampling bias should not exist.
A more exciting explanation is that there was an interac-
tion between the lineage of the virus and the host genetics.
This effect could have arisen if the host acts as a virus ﬁlter,
so only some HCV viruses can infect hosts that have IL28B
genotypes that increase clearance rate. Another explanation
is that the host IL28B genotype selects for speciﬁc virus
mutations from amongst the quasispecies shortly after the
infection has occurred, explaining their genetic similarity.
This would be a case of parallel evolution (organisms that
have evolved in similar environmental conditions and face
the same challenges tend to look alike). However, as phylo-
genetic signal was nearly signiﬁcant for only one host SNP
(IL28B–917) for the complete data set only, and the same
degree of signal was also present on a third-site phylogeny
(where most selective effects of the virus should be absent),
then these ﬁndings do not strongly suggest that there is
major selection acting by the host. Importantly, this signiﬁ-
cant interaction we detected between the virus phylogeny
and the host genetics should not be mixed with the known
correlation between host genetics and infection outcome
Figure 7 Phylogenetic signal estimated from simulated data with
known control value (c), along the Genotype 1 phylogeny. 100 tipsets
were simulated per input value, with the number of estimates that are
signiﬁcant listed in the x-axis. Each point shows the mean value of the
signiﬁcant estimates, with error bars representing 95% conﬁdence
intervals. The dotted line shows the y = x line; the dashed line shows a
linear regression ﬁt, with slope 0.35 (adjusted R2 = 0.88, P = 0.0392).
544
© 2014 The Authors. Evolutionary Applications published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 7 (2014) 533–547
Virus effect of hepatitis C infection
Hartﬁeld et al.
 17524571, 2014, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/eva.12151 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
(Thomas et al. 2009). However, one interesting extension
would be to determine the effect of the virus phylogeny on
inferring the correlation between host IL28B polymor-
phism and infection outcome. This has been done for HIV
(Bhattacharya et al. 2007), but to achieve this for HCV, a
larger data set is required.
Perspectives
It is becoming increasingly recognized that the variance in
viral infection outcomes is not just due to host genetics;
differences in the virus also plays an important role
(Alizon et al. 2011). While there is now substantial work
investigating how infection outcomes correlate amongst
related strains in HIV [reviewed in M€uller et al. (2011)],
little work has been undertaken for other viruses of
humans, including HCV. The results of this study show
that there is a correlation in HCV infection outcome
between related strains, for Genotype 1 at least. These
ﬁndings have important implications in the prognosis of
HCV infections in general and can be used to improve
and potentially generate new virus-speciﬁc or host-speciﬁc
therapies.
These ﬁndings also shed some interesting light on the
process of virus evolution. Superﬁcially, it seems bafﬂing as
to why HCV infections that clear immediately after the
acute stage should be maintained by the virus genotype, as
their presence appears to reduce opportunities to spread
the pathogen. It could be that ‘clearer’ HCV genotypes are
weakly deleterious, as reﬂected in the low frequency of clea-
rers that are observed. These weakly deleterious genotypes
could be maintained between hosts at low frequencies via
recurrent mutation (Wright 1931), which could lead to
clearer HCV infections having similar genotypes, if muta-
tion is required at speciﬁc sites to cause a clearing infection.
This mechanism could also be an example of ‘short-
sighted’ evolution of HCV, in which clearing outcomes
evolve due to a within-host beneﬁt, but at a cost of reduced
transmission (Levin and Bull 1994). We therefore antici-
pate that these results will motivate further work into eluci-
dating the interactions between virus and host genotypes,
and also into how these interactions affect the evolution of
virulence and pathogen transmission. A phylogenetic
analysis of ancestral ‘founding’ variants could be used to
investigate this hypothesis; if clearing variants were delete-
rious in the long term, then they would become extinct
over short timescales. Otherwise, they would persist and
form distinct subclades.
Our method is able to elucidate correlations between
virus genetics and categorical infection outcomes that
may not be detectable using standard clustering statistics
(Parker et al. 2008). In contrast with earlier methods, this
method also provides a quantitative estimate of virus
control over a categorical trait, as well as taking into
account uncertainty in phylogenetic sampling, which is a
common issue (Parker et al. 2008). However, the method
can be inherently noisy, as reﬂected in the high signal
levels detected for randomized tips and the fact that we
did not detect signiﬁcant signal for Genotype 3, even
after correcting for the host’s genotype (see also power
simulations, Fig. 7). We anticipate that if more sequences
were available, then the method would be less affected by
its inherent noise. Secondly, phylogenies were constructed
based on genetic data of only a part of the HCV genome,
as opposed to whole-genome sequences. Analysing longer
sequences or different regions of the HCV genome might
result in phylogenies that more accurately reﬂect the
complete set of virus variants. Some areas of the genome
have minimal host interactions, whereas other regions
strongly interact with the innate and adaptive elements of
the host immune response. Therefore, phylogenies based
on other parts of the virus genome could also reveal
different interaction effects with host genetics. Finally, we
hope that future research would reﬁne methodology,
so that it would be more likely to detect low levels of
phylogenetic signal.
Conclusion
In summary, by creating a method to simulate inheritance
of a binary trait along a set of phylogenetic trees, we have
found that the HCV phylogeny controls 67% of the phylo-
genetic signal of acute HCV infection for Genotype 1. This
outcome could have arisen due to an inherited or transmit-
ted trait within the HCV genome. Overall, this ﬁnding not
only suggests that the virus genotype can affect infection
outcome, but this is also dependent on the speciﬁc subtype
of HCV, and host genetics. These ﬁndings should motivate
further research into host–parasite interactions that affect
virus evolution.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Roger Kouyos and Sebastian Bon-
hoeffer for discussions, and two anonymous reviewers for
comments on the manuscript. The HITS investigators
include Andrew Lloyd, Fabio Luciani, Michael Levy, Kate
Dolan, Peter White, Bill Rawlinson, Paul Haber, Carla Trel-
oar, Greg Dore and Lisa Maher. The HITS-p cohort was
supported
by
an
NHMRC
Partnership
Grant
(No.
1016351). FL and RB were supported by NHMRC Early
Career Fellowships (No. 510428 and 630733, respectively)
and AL by a NHMRC Practitioner Fellowship (No.
510246). M.H. is funded by an ATIP-Avenir grant from
CNRS and INSERM to S.A.; S.A. and M.H. acknowledge
additional support from the CNRS and the IRD.
© 2014 The Authors. Evolutionary Applications published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 7 (2014) 533–547
545
Hartﬁeld et al.
Virus effect of hepatitis C infection
 17524571, 2014, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/eva.12151 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Data archiving statement
HCV genome samples have been uploaded to GenBank
(accession IDs KJ437271 – KJ437343). Simulation data
used for analysis are available from the Dryad Digital
Repository: http://dx.doi.org/10.5061/dryad.3978f.
Literature cited
Alizon, S., V. von Wyl, T. Stadler, R. D. Kouyos, S. Yerly, B. Hirschel, J.
B€oni et al. 2010. Phylogenetic approach reveals that virus genotype
largely determines HIV set-point viral load. PLoS Pathogens 6:
e1001123.
Alizon, S., F. Luciani, and R. R. Regoes 2011. Epidemiological and clini-
cal consequences of within-host evolution. Trends in Microbiology
19:24–32.
Bhattacharya, T., M. Daniels, D. Heckerman, B. Foley, N. Frahm, C.
Kadie, J. Carlson et al. 2007. Founder effects in the assessment of HIV
polymorphisms and HLA allele associations. Science 315:1583–1586.
Darriba, D., G. L. Taboada, R. Doallo, and D. Posada 2012. jModelTest
2: more models, new heuristics and parallel computing. Nature Meth-
ods 9:772.
Dolan, K., S. Teutsch, N. Scheuer, M. Levy, W. Rawlinson, J. Kaldor, A.
Lloyd et al. 2010. Incidence and risk for acute hepatitis C infection
during imprisonment in Australia. European Journal of Epidemiology
25:143–148.
Drummond, A. J., A. Rambaut, B. Shapiro, and O. G. Pybus 2005. Bayes-
ian coalescent inference of past population dynamics from molecular
sequences. Molecular Biology and Evolution 22:1185–1192.
Drummond, A. J., M. A. Suchard, D. Xie, and A. Rambaut 2012. Bayes-
ian phylogenetics with BEAUti and the BEAST 1.7. Molecular Biology
and Evolution 29:1969–1973.
Faﬁ-Kremer, S., I. Fofana, E. Soulier, P. Carolla, P. Meuleman, G. Le-
roux-Roels, A. H. Patel et al. 2010. Viral entry and escape from anti-
body-mediated neutralization inﬂuence hepatitis C virus reinfection
in liver transplantation. Journal of Experimental Medicine 207:2019–
2031.
Farci, P., A. Shimoda, A. Coiana, G. Diaz, G. Peddis, J. C. Melpolder, A.
Strazzera et al. 2000. The outcome of acute hepatitis C predicted by
the evolution of the viral quasispecies. Science 288:339–344.
Frank, C., M. K. Mohamed, G. T. Strickland, D. Lavanchy, R. R. Arthur,
L. S. Magder, T. E. Khoby et al. 2000. The role of parenteral antis-
chistosomal therapy in the spread of hepatitis C virus in Egypt. The
Lancet 355:887–891.
Ge, D., J. Fellay, A. J. Thompson, J. S. Simon, K. V. Shianna, T. J. Urban,
E. L. Heinzen et al. 2009. Genetic variation in IL28B predicts hepatitis
C treatment-induced viral clearance. Nature 461:399–401.
Gray, R. R., J. Parker, P. Lemey, M. Salemi, A. Katzourakis, and O. G.
Pybus 2011. The mode and tempo of hepatitis C virus evolution
within and among hosts. BMC Evolutionary Biology 11:00–00.
Grebely, J., M. Prins, M. Hellard, A. L. Cox, W. O. Osburn, G.
Lauer, K. Page et al. 2012. Hepatitis C virus clearance, reinfec-
tion, and persistence, with insights from studies of injecting
drug users: towards a vaccine. The Lancet Infectious Diseases
12:408–414.
Grebely, J., K. Page, R. Sacks-Davis, M. Schim van der Loeff, T. M. Rice,
J. Bruneau, M. D. Morris et al. 2014. The effects of female sex, viral
genotype, and IL28B genotype on spontaneous clearance of acute
hepatitis C Virus infection. Hepatology 59:109–120.
Guindon, S., and O. Gascuel 2003. A simple, fast, and accurate algorithm
to estimate large phylogenies by maximum likelihood. Systematic
Biology 52:696–704.
Guindon, S., J.-F. Dufayard, V. Lefort, M. Anisimova, W. Hordijk, and
O. Gascuel 2010. New algorithms and methods to estimate maxi-
mum-likelihood phylogenies: assessing the performance of PhyML
3.0. Systematic Biology 59:307–321.
Hecht, F. M., W. Hartogensis, L. Bragg, P. Bacchetti, R. Atchison, R.
Grant, J. Barbour et al. 2010. HIV RNA level in early infection is pre-
dicted by viral load in the transmission source. AIDS 24:941–945.
Hollingsworth, T. D., O. Laeyendecker, G. Shirreff, C. A. Donnelly, D.
Serwadda, M. J. Wawer, N. Kiwanuka et al. 2010. HIV-1 transmitting
couples have similar viral load set-points in Rakai, Uganda. PLoS
Pathogens 6:e1000876 EP.
Hue, S., J. P. Clewley, P. A. Cane, and D. Pillay 2004. HIV-1 pol gene
variation is sufﬁcient for reconstruction of transmissions in the era of
antiretroviral therapy. AIDS 18:719–728.
Janssen, H. L. A., H. W. Reesink, E. J. Lawitz, S. Zeuzem, M. Rodriguez-
Torres, K. Patel, A. J. van der Meer et al. 2013. Treatment of HCV
infection by targeting microRNA. New England Journal of Medicine
368:1685–1694.
Kasprowicz, V., Y.-H. Kang, M. Lucas, J. Schulze zur Wiesch, T. Kunt-
zen, V. Fleming, B. E. Nolan et al. 2010. Hepatitis C virus (HCV)
sequence variation induces an HCV-speciﬁc T-cell phenotype analo-
gous to spontaneous resolution. Journal of Virology 84:1656–1663.
Kumar, U., J. Brown, J. Monjardino, and H. C. Thomas 1993. Sequence
variation in the large envelope glycoprotein (E2/NS1) of hepatitis C
virus during chronic infection. Journal of Infectious Diseases
167:726–730.
Kuntzen, T., J. Timm, A. Berical, L. L. Lewis-Ximenez, A. Jones, B. No-
lan, J. Schulzezur Wiesch et al. 2007. Viral sequence evolution in acute
hepatitis C virus infection. Journal of Virology 81:11658–11668.
Lauer, G. M., and B. D. Walker 2001. Hepatitis C virus infection. New
England Journal of Medicine 345:41–52.
Leitner, T., D. Escanilla, C. Franzen, M. Uhlen, and J. Albert 1996. Accu-
rate reconstruction of a known HIV-1 transmission history by phylo-
genetic tree analysis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America 93:10864–10869.
Levin, B. R., and J. J. Bull 1994. Short-sighted evolution and the viru-
lence of pathogenic microorganisms. Trends in Microbiology 2:76–81.
Liu, L., B. E. Fisher, K. A. Dowd, J. Astemborski, A. L. Cox, and S. C.
Ray 2010. Acceleration of hepatitis C virus envelope evolution in
humans is consistent with progressive humoral immune selection dur-
ing the transition from acute to chronic infection. Journal of Virology
84:5067–5077.
Liu, L., B. E. Fisher, D. L. Thomas, A. L. Cox, and S. C. Ray 2012. Spon-
taneous clearance of primary acute hepatitis C virus infection corre-
lated with high initial viral RNA level and rapid HVR1 evolution.
Hepatology 55:1684–1691.
Magiorkinis, G., V. Sypsa, E. Magiorkinis, D. Paraskevis, A. Katsoulidou,
R. Belshaw, C. Fraser et al. 2013. Integrating phylodynamics and epi-
demiology to estimate transmission diversity in viral epidemics. PLoS
Computational Biology 9:e1002876 EP.
Micallef, J. M., J. M. Kaldor, and G. J. Dore 2006. Spontaneous viral
clearance following acute hepatitis C infection: a systematic review of
longitudinal studies. Journal of Viral Hepatitis 13:34–41.
M€uller, V., C. Fraser, and J. T. Herbeck 2011. A strong case for viral
genetic factors in HIV virulence. Viruses 3:204–216.
Osburn, W. O., B. E. Fisher, K. A. Dowd, G. Urban, L. Liu, S. C. Ray, D.
L. Thomas et al. 2010. Spontaneous control of primary hepatitis C
546
© 2014 The Authors. Evolutionary Applications published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 7 (2014) 533–547
Virus effect of hepatitis C infection
Hartﬁeld et al.
 17524571, 2014, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/eva.12151 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
virus infection and immunity against persistent reinfection. Gastroen-
terology 138:315–324.
Pagel, M. 1994. Detecting correlated evolution on phylogenies: a general
method for the comparative analysis of discrete characters. Proceed-
ings of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences
255:37–45.
Paradis, E., J. Claude, and K. Strimmer 2004. APE: analyses of
phylogenetics and evolution in R language. Bioinformatics
20:289–290.
Parker, J., A. Rambaut, and O. G. Pybus 2008. Correlating viral pheno-
types with phylogeny: accounting for phylogenetic uncertainty. Infec-
tion, Genetics and Evolution 8:239–246.
Pham, S. T., R. A. Bull, J. M. Bennett, W. D. Rawlinson, G. J. Dore, A. R.
Lloyd, and P. A. White 2010. Frequent multiple hepatitis C virus
infections among injection drug users in a prison setting. Hepatology
52:1564–1572.
Ploss, A., and J. Dubuisson 2012. New advances in the molecular biology
of hepatitis C virus infection: towards the identiﬁcation of new treat-
ment targets. Gut 61:i25–i35.
Pybus, O. G., M. A. Charleston, S. Gupta, A. Rambaut, E. C. Holmes,
and P. H. Harvey 2001. The epidemic behavior of the hepatitis C
Virus. Science 292:2323–2325.
Pybus, O. G., A. J. Drummond, T. Nakano, B. H. Robertson, and A.
Rambaut 2003. The epidemiology and iatrogenic transmission of hep-
atitis C virus in Egypt: a Bayesian coalescent approach. Molecular
Biology and Evolution 20:381–387.
R Development Core Team 2008. R: A Language and Environment for
Statistical Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing,
Vienna, Austria. ISBN 3-900051-07-0
Raghwani, J., X. V. Thomas, S. M. Koekkoek, J. Schinkel, R. Molenkamp,
T. J. van de Laar, Y. Takebe et al. 2012. Origin and evolution of the
unique hepatitis C virus circulating recombinant form 2k/1b. Journal
of Virology 86:2212–2220.
Rauch, A., Z. Kutalik, P. Descombes, T. Cai, J. Di Iulio, T. Mueller, M.
Bochud et al. 2010. Genetic variation in IL28B is associated with
chronic hepatitis C and treatment failure: a genome-wide association
study. Gastroenterology 138:1338–1345.e7
Shirreff, G., S. Alizon, A. Cori, H. F. G€unthard, O. Laeyendecker, A. van
Sighem, D. Bezemer et al. 2013. How effectively can HIV phylogenies
be used to measure heritability? Evolution, Medicine, and Public
Health 1:209–224.
Simmonds, P. 2004. Genetic diversity and evolution of hepatitis C virus
– 15 years on. Journal of General Virology 85:3173–3188.
Simmonds, P., J. Bukh, C. Combet, G. Deleage, N. Enomoto, S. Fein-
stone, P. Halfon et al. 2005. Consensus proposals for a uniﬁed system
of nomenclature of hepatitis C virus genotypes. Hepatology 42:962–
973.
Stadler, T., R. Kouyos, V. von Wyl, S. Yerly, J. B€oni, P. B€urgisser, T.
Klimkait et al. 2012. Estimating the basic reproductive number from
viral sequence data. Molecular Biology and Evolution 29:347–357.
Stadler, T., D. K€uhnert, S. Bonhoeffer, and A. J. Drummond 2013.
Birth–death skyline plot reveals temporal changes of epidemic spread
in HIV and hepatitis C virus (HCV). Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 110:228–233.
Tang, J., S. Tang, E. Lobashevsky, I. Zulu, G. Aldrovandi, S. Allen, and R.
A. Kaslow 2004. HLA allele sharing and HIV type 1 viremia in sero-
converting Zambians with known transmitting partners. AIDS
Research and Human Retroviruses 20:19–25.
Teutsch, S., F. Luciani, N. Scheuer, L. McCredie, P. Hosseiny, W. Rawl-
inson, J. Kaldor et al. 2010. Incidence of primary hepatitis C infection
and risk factors for transmission in an Australian prisoner cohort.
BMC Public Health 10:633.
Thomas, D. L., C. L. Thio, M. P. Martin, Y. Qi, D. Ge, C. O’hUigin, J.
Kidd et al. 2009. Genetic variation in IL28B and spontaneous clear-
ance of hepatitis C virus. Nature 461:798–801.
Tillmann, H. L., A. J. Thompson, K. Patel, M. Wiese, H. Tenckhoff, H.
D. Nischalke, Y. Lokhnygina et al. 2010. A polymorphism near IL28B
is associated with spontaneous clearance of acute hepatitis C virus and
jaundice. Gastroenterology 139:1586–1592.e1
Visscher, P. M., W. G. Hill, and N. R. Wray 2008. Heritability in the ge-
nomics era – concepts and misconceptions. Nature Reviews Genetics
9:255–266.
Weiner, A. J., H. M. Geysen, C. Christopherson, J. E. Hall, T. J. Mason,
G. Saracco, F. Bonino et al. 1992. Evidence for immune selection of
hepatitis C virus (HCV) putative envelope glycoprotein variants:
potential role in chronic HCV infections. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 89:3468–3472.
Wright, S. 1931. Evolution in Mendelian populations. Genetics 16:97–
159.
Supporting Information
Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version
of this article:
Table S1. Overview of third-site only phylogeny results.
Figure S1. Plots of how various simulation statistics vary with
increased virus control for our HCV ‘Genotype 1’ coalescent phylogeny.
Figure S2. Phylogeny of the joint Genotypes 1 and 3 data set.
Figure S3. Estimate of control signal for a single trait, based on a
birthdeath phylogeny for all sequences.
Figure S4. Estimate of control signal for a single trait, based on a
birthdeath phylogeny, for sequences from Genotype 1.
Figure S5. As Fig. S4, but with sequences from Genotype 3.
© 2014 The Authors. Evolutionary Applications published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 7 (2014) 533–547
547
Hartﬁeld et al.
Virus effect of hepatitis C infection
 17524571, 2014, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/eva.12151 by California Digital Library University Of California, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
