PNAS  2023  Vol. 120  No. 48  e2306723120
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2306723120   1 of 9
RESEARCH ARTICLE | 
Significance
Wind-­pollinated dioecious plants 
are economically and ecologically 
important, but their phenology is 
understudied. Successful 
pollination in such species is 
dependent upon male and 
female individuals flowering 
synchronously and before leaves 
emerge and physically impede 
pollen dispersal. Using 
herbarium specimens and 
volunteer observations of 
cottonwood (Populus) species, 
we demonstrate that males 
generally flower earlier and 
advance their flowering time to 
greater degrees in response to 
warming compared to females. 
Also, flowering overall advances 
faster with warming than does 
the timing of leaf out. Future 
climate change is thus predicted 
to alter both the absolute and 
relative timing of these events, 
leading to increased temporal 
separation between male and 
female flowering and flowering 
and leaf out, impacting these 
species’ reproductive success.
Author contributions: Y.X. and D.S.P. designed research; 
Y.X., H.T.T., L.G.B., C.H.H., and D.S.P. performed research; 
Y.X. and D.S.P. analyzed data; H.T.T., L.G.B., and C.H.H. 
collected data; and Y.X. and D.S.P. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no competing interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission. D.W.I. is a guest 
editor invited by the Editorial Board.
Copyright © 2023 the Author(s). Published by PNAS. 
This article is distributed under Creative Commons 
Attribution-­NonCommercial-­NoDerivatives License 4.0 
(CC BY-­NC-­ND).
1To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: 
xiey2@nku.edu or danielpark@purdue.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at 
https://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.​
2306723120/-­/DCSupplemental.
Published November 13, 2023.
ECOLOGY
Sex-­dependent phenological responses to climate vary across 
species’ ranges
Yingying Xiea,b,c,1
, Hanna T. Thammavonga, Lily G. Berryd
, Chingyan H. Huanga, and Daniel S. Parka,b,1
Edited by David W. Inouye, University of Maryland at College Park, College Park, MD; received April 27, 2023; accepted September 27, 2023 by  
Editorial Board Member Douglas E. Soltis
Anthropogenic climate change has significantly altered the flowering times (i.e., phe-
nology) of plants worldwide, affecting their reproduction, survival, and interactions. 
Recent studies utilizing herbarium specimens have uncovered significant intra-­ and 
inter-­specific variation in flowering phenology and its response to changes in climate 
but have mostly been limited to animal-­pollinated species. Thus, despite their economic 
and ecological importance, variation in phenological responses to climate remain largely 
unexplored among and within wind-­pollinated dioecious species and across their sexes. 
Using both herbarium specimens and volunteer observations of cottonwood (Populus) 
species, we examined how phenological sensitivity to climate varies across species, their 
ranges, sexes, and phenophases. The timing of flowering varied significantly across 
and within species, as did their sensitivity to spring temperature. In particular, male 
flowering generally happened earlier in the season and was more sensitive to warming 
than female flowering. Further, the onset of flowering was more sensitive to changes 
in temperature than leaf out. Increased temporal gaps between male and female flow-
ering time and between the first open flower date and leaf out date were predicted for 
the future under two climate change scenarios. These shifts will impact the efficacy of 
sexual reproduction and gene flow among species. Our study demonstrates significant 
inter-­ and intra-­specific variation in phenology and its responses to environmental cues, 
across species’ ranges, phenophases, and sex, in wind-­pollinated species. These variations 
need to be considered to predict accurately the effects of climate change and assess their 
ecological and evolutionary consequences.
anemophily | flowering time | intra-­specific variation | leaf out | wind-­pollination
Anthropogenic climate change has significantly altered the timing of life history events (i.e., 
phenology) of plants worldwide (1, 2). For instance, plants in New York state USA have 
been shown to flower 10.5 d earlier on average in contemporary years than in the early to 
mid-­19th century in response to warming spring temperatures (3). Such shifts in flowering 
time affect the reproduction and survival of plant species as well as those of other species 
that interact with them (4–7). Along these lines, herbarium specimens represent an inval­
uable resource increasingly applied in studies of reproductive phenology, which have uncov­
ered significant inter-­ and intra-­specific variation in how flowering and fruiting times 
respond to changes in climate (4, 8–11). Therefore, climate change may cause heterogeneous 
temporal shifts among interacting members of communities and species. However, most 
of this research has been limited to animal-­pollinated species with large and/or showy 
flowers due to their ease of phenological scoring from herbarium specimens (9). Thus, less 
is known about how flowering phenology, and its sensitivity to environmental forcings, 
may vary across the wider array of pollination syndromes. For instance, there is a lack of 
consensus on whether wind-­pollinated species have advanced their flowering to greater or 
lesser degrees than insect-­pollinated species in response to climate change (12, 13).
In particular, the phenology of wind-­pollinated dioecious species has been largely 
overlooked across broad spatial scales (14). Dioecy has evolved in nearly half of all 
angiosperm families (15) and occurs in many ecologically and economically important 
taxa such as cottonwoods (Populus spp.) and willows (Salix spp.). Though studies focused 
on allergens have explored aspects of male flowering phenology via pollen traps 
(16, 17), variation in phenological responses to climate remain largely unexplored among 
and within wind-­pollinated species, and across sexes. This may be partially due to the 
fact that the typically small, nonshowy nature of wind-­pollinated flowers makes it i) 
difficult to rely on nonexpert crowdworkers to recognize different sexes and phenophases 
and ii) time-­consuming to generate the training data necessary to apply AI approaches, 
which are two of the most widely utilized approaches to extract phenological information 
from large amounts of specimens (18, 19).
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by UCOP University of California Office of the President on April 1, 2025 from IP address 128.48.53.147.
2 of 9   https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2306723120
pnas.org
Successful pollination is essential for the sexual reproduction of 
flowering plant species. Two phenological mechanisms required for 
effective pollination among many wind-­pollinated dioecious species 
are i) synchrony between the flowering of males and females; and 
ii) the temporal separation of flowering and leafing phenophases 
(Fig. 1). Synchrony in flowering time between sexes is especially 
critical for the reproductive success of dioecious plant species (20, 
21). Thus, we may expect that male and female individuals of the 
same species should respond similarly to changes in climate to ensure 
synchrony and effective reproduction, particularly in dioecious spe­
cies that rely upon a nonspecific vector (i.e., wind pollination). 
Individuals of dioecious, wind-­pollinated species that flower much 
earlier (or later) than others nearby would likely be at a selective 
disadvantage due to the comparative lack of available mates. Further, 
the anthers of wind-­pollinated plants are generally only exposed for 
a short time before they dehisce and release their pollen, and pollen 
decay can be rapid in these species (22, 23). Also, as leaves can reduce 
wind velocity and function as physical barriers to pollen transport, 
the majority of wind-­pollinated tree species flower before leaf out, 
leaving a relatively short temporal window when successful repro­
duction is likely (21). Indeed, studies have shown that individuals 
of wind-­pollinated species tend to flower more synchronously than 
those of animal-­pollinated species (24, 25). However, male and 
female plants can differ across many traits, especially those related 
to reproduction (26–29), and the slightly earlier flowering of males 
has been observed in some wind-­pollinated dioecious species 
(14, 30, 31). Given that earlier flowering individuals have generally 
been found to be more sensitive to early-­season climatic cues within 
the same species, (4, 7, 9) we hypothesize that male flowering phe­
nology is more sensitive to shifts in temperature than that of females 
and that this sexual variation will cause flowering times to diverge 
among sexes with future climate change, resulting in lower pollina­
tion efficiency. Previous studies have suggested that even subtle 
differences among sexes in their responses to climate change can 
negatively affect plant population growth, survival, and adaptive 
potential by altering effective population size (32–34).
Flowering initiates before leafing in many wind-­pollinated (dio­
ecious) species. The temporal proximity and overlap between repro­
ductive and vegetative phenophases can affect pollination efficacy 
as leaves can reduce wind velocity and function as physical barriers 
to pollen transport and reception (21). For instance, studies have 
found that c. 3,000 grains of pollen can be intercepted per cm2 of 
leaf area (35) and nearly all intercepted pollen (>99%) falls to the 
ground within a short span of time (36). Thus, for wind-­pollinated 
species that flower prior to leaf development, the period of time 
between these phenophases is critical to successful reproduction. 
Along these lines, a previous study on four European tree species 
suggested that the interval of time between flower and leaf devel­
opment has been increasing in response to warming temperatures 
and that the magnitude of this change may vary across species and 
populations (37). In contrast, a controlled experiment using branch 
cuttings of 12 common shrubs and trees in North America sug­
gested that flower–leaf interphases would become shorter with cli­
mate change (38). However, the majority of species examined in 
these studies do not initiate flowering prior to leaf-­out and were not 
dioecious, and it remains uncertain how climate change may alter 
the temporal proximity and overlap between species’ reproductive 
and vegetative phenophases. We hypothesize that flowering phe­
nology will be more responsive to warming than leaf-­out phenology 
in wind-­pollinated dioecious species because they are under stronger 
pressure to reproduce before the emergence of physical barriers to 
pollination and that this will result in extended temporal separation 
between flower and leaf development with climate change. Further, 
we expect that the degree of variation in phenological responses to 
climate will differ among and within species due to adaptations to 
heterogeneous conditions across their ranges (4, 9).
To test these hypotheses, we examined thousands of herbarium 
specimens of species in the genus Populus across North America 
Fig. 1. Phenological overlap and pollination efficiency. Changes in the temporal overlap among sexes (A) and phenophases (B) affect pollination efficiency in 
contrasting ways.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by UCOP University of California Office of the President on April 1, 2025 from IP address 128.48.53.147.
PNAS  2023  Vol. 120  No. 48  e2306723120
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2306723120   3 of 9
and determined the sex and phenological stage of each specimen. 
Using these data and additional data on leaf phenology collected 
by community scientists, we examined how phenological sensitivity 
to climate varies among species, across species ranges, between sexes, 
and between different phenophases to assess how climate change 
may affect the synchrony and reproduction of wind-­pollinated 
dioecious species. We assess potential future intraspecific mis­
matches between the flowering times of males and females, and 
between the timing of flowering and leaf out across species ranges.
Materials and Methods
Study System. The genus Populus L. (Salicaceae) consists of deciduous and 
fast-­growing forest tree species that are widely distributed in the Northern 
Hemisphere. Most species from this genus are dioecious and bloom in early 
spring prior to leaf emergence. Both male and female flowers are borne on 
pendant catkins (39). They are wind-­pollinated and produce large amounts of 
wind-­dispersed pollen and tiny cottony seeds. Reported sex ratios for natural 
populations of various Populus species range from female-­biased to balanced 
(approximately 1:1) and male-­biased (40, 41). Site-­specific biases in sex ratio 
are hypothesized to be associated with environmental conditions, though more 
studies are needed (39, 41). Individual trees flower for 1 to 2 wk (42).
In this study, we focus on eight wind-­pollinated dioecious species from the 
genus, mainly distributed in North America: Populus alba L., Populus angustifolia 
James, Populus balsamifera L., Populus deltoides W. Bartram ex Marshall, Populus 
fremontii S. Watson, Populus grandidentata Michx., Populus tremuloides Michx, 
and Populus trichocarpa Torr. and A.Gray ex Hook. We selected these species as 
they i) are wind-­pollinated and dioecious; ii) have a large geographic distribution 
in North America; and iii) have a large number of digitized specimen images 
available (>500).
Phenology Data. We obtained images of digitized herbarium specimens for eight 
Populus species collected across 119 y (1901 to 2019) in the United States and 
Canada. Images were downloaded from the Integrated Digitized Biocollections 
database (iDigBio; (43)) and the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF; 
(44, 45)). These records comprised a total of 13,761 specimens collected between 
1901 and 2019. In addition, we manually examined and annotated all 120 physical 
specimens of these species in the Kriebel Herbarium (PUL) at Purdue University. We 
also obtained phenological determinations of 29 specimens of these species from 
the Consortium of California Herbaria, which provides phenological information 
gathered as part of the California Phenology Thematic Collections Network.
Records of herbarium specimens with incomplete or incorrect date informa-
tion were removed. Dates were determined as incorrect when the month of col-
lection was not within the range of 1 to 12 or the day of collection was not within 
the range of 1 to 31. We selected records with either geographic coordinates 
or at least county-­level locality information. For each specimen, collection date, 
year of collection, elevation, latitude, longitude, country, state, and county were 
extracted from metadata. The presence of flowers and fruits was manually iden-
tified for all specimen images at maximum available resolution using ImageAnt 
(https://gitlab.com/stuckyb/imageant). In addition, floral sex (male/female) was 
also identified for each specimen image. The small number of specimens that 
comprised branches from both male and female plants were counted separately 
for each sex—i.e., we interpreted them as indicating the presence of both flowering 
males and females at the time and location of collection.
Duplicated data, such as multiple photos of the same specimen, or records for the 
same species collected on the same date in the same county were removed. Outliers 
in collection date (day of year) were detected and removed using the interquartile 
range (IQR) criterion for each species, which is a common approach in detecting 
and removing outliers in datasets in ecology and other fields (46–48). Using this 
approach, data points above q0.75 + 1.5 × IQR or below q0.25 − 1.5 × IQR were 
determined as outliers, where q0.25 and q0.75 represent the first and third quar-
tiles, respectively. The final dataset comprised 2,765 specimens with flowers and 
determinable sex across eight species from 1901 to 2019 (SI Appendix, Fig. S1).
We also obtained phenological observation data for six of our focal species 
from the National Phenology Network (NPN), generated by volunteer community 
scientists in the United States (49). We focused on two phenophases; “leaves” and 
“open flower” (49). Phenological determinations made by nonexpert volunteers 
using NPN definitions show high interobserver agreement and are highly con-
gruent with expert assessments (50). To determine the first leaf out and first open 
flower dates, the first “yes” record that was observed ≤10 d after a “no” record was 
used (51). To further minimize the sampling bias in observations, only sites with 
observations for both phenophases for each species were considered. Outliers 
for each phenophase and species were removed using the same IQR criterion 
approach applied to the specimen data above. After the data cleaning, we excluded 
P. angustifolia and P. trichocarpa due to low sample size (<20) and were left with 
four species (P. balsamifera, P. deltoides, P. grandidentata, and P. tremuloides) for 
which we had sufficient data (SI Appendix, Fig. S1). The final NPN dataset comprised 
1,211 phenological observation collected from 2007 to 2021, including 758 first 
leaf out dates and 453 first open flower dates across four species.
Environmental Data. As precise locality data are not available for the majority 
of historic specimen records (52, 53), we used county as our geographical unit of 
analysis. For each county and year, we calculated the mean of each climatic varia-
ble and assigned these values to each specimen (4, 9). We used Climatologies at 
High resolution for the Earth’s Land Surface Areas (CHELSA) monthly climate data 
with 1-­km spatial resolution including maximum and minimum temperature 
and total precipitation in each month from CHELSAcruts 1901 to 2016 (54) and 
CHELSA v2.1 2017 to 2019 (55). Mean maximum and minimum temperature 
and total precipitation in winter and spring were calculated for each county in 
the United States and Canada. For the NPN observations, which have accurate 
coordinate data, we used the geographic coordinates and elevation of NPN 
sites to extract climatic data including mean annual temperature, mean annual 
precipitation, mean minimum, average, and maximum temperature and total 
precipitation in winter and spring for each observation site over 121 y (1901 to 
2021) available from ClimateNA v. 7.3, which downscales gridded climate data to 
scale-­free point locations (56). Temperature variables were in degrees Celsius (°C) 
and precipitation variables in millimeters (mm). Winter was defined as a 3-­mo 
period from December to February, and spring was defined as a 3-­mo period 
from March to May, following previous phenological studies from the region 
(4, 9, 57). A large pool of research suggests that winter and spring temperature are 
the primary climatic drivers of both the vegetative and reproductive phenology 
of woody plant species in temperate regions (7, 9, 38, 58, 59).
In order to partition geographic and interannual variation in climate, we calcu-
lated the long-­term average values (1901 to 2019) of mean maximum and min-
imum temperature and total precipitation in winter and spring for each county 
and their temporal anomalies (i.e., the deviation between the annual and the 
long-­term climatic condition) in the collection year for each county (11, 60). As 
local precipitation conditions and the biological effects of precipitation anomalies 
of equal magnitude can vary greatly across the geographic range of species, we 
calculated precipitation anomalies as the proportional value to the long-­term 
mean as suggested by Pearson et al. (11), so the precipitation effects across sites 
were standardized. The same approach was applied to the climate variables from 
ClimateNA in calculating the long-­term average and climate anomalies associated 
with NPN observations. Temperature anomalies were estimated in degree Celsius 
(°C) and precipitation anomalies in unitless proportions. In addition, we used 
global elevation data (GTOPO30, DOI: 10.5066/F7DF6PQS) with 1-­km spatial 
resolution to calculate county average elevation.
Statistical Modeling. We used linear mixed-­effect models to examine the inter-­ 
and intraspecies variation in phenological sensitivities to climate change between 
sex and among ecoregions across species’ ranges. Prior studies and our prelimi-
nary analyses suggested that the phenology of P. fremontii populations strongly 
associate with winter and spring precipitation (61, 62), in contrast to the other 
seven species in our study whose phenologies are mainly affected by temperature 
(63, 64). Thus, we conducted separate analyses on P. fremontti.
For the other seven species, we fitted a linear mixed-­effect model that esti-
mated the phenological sensitivity to warming between sex, among species, and 
across the landscape within species’ ranges. Preliminary modeling suggested the 
mean maximum temperature in spring was the best climate variable affecting 
flowering phenology of these species by comparing the mean minimum, maxi-
mum, and average temperatures in spring and winter. Thus, we included climate 
anomalies of mean maximum spring temperature and spring precipitation and 
their interactions in the model representing effects of interannual variations in 
climate. Additionally, latitude and elevation were included as fixed effect com-
ponents of the model representing the effects of geographic variation. As we 
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by UCOP University of California Office of the President on April 1, 2025 from IP address 128.48.53.147.
4 of 9   https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2306723120
pnas.org
hypothesized that phenological sensitivities to climate may vary among species, 
between sex, and among populations within species, we included species, sex, 
and ecoregion as nested random components in the model; specifically, a ran-
dom intercept term and a random slope term of temperature anomaly for each 
species, between sex, and among ecoregions. The random intercept allowed the 
model to incorporate the phenological variation among species in specific sex 
and ecoregion, while the random slope estimated the phenological sensitivities 
to temperature anomaly change (i.e., interannual variation) for each group. We 
used ecoregions classified by the United States Environmental Protection Agency 
Level II delimitations for North America (65). Only ecoregions with at least 3 
observations for both sexes of each species were included in the model analysis to 
reduce potential bias from small sample sizes. The best model explained 49% of 
the total variance in Populus flowering phenology (conditional R2 = 0.49). A linear 
mixed-­effect model was fitted for P. fremontii separately. Based on preliminary 
modeling of P. fremontii, we selected the anomalies of winter temperature and 
precipitation and their interaction in the model to represent the interannual vari-
ation of climate. Latitude and elevation were included representing the effects of 
geographic variation. The random effect of the model included a random intercept 
term and a random slope term of temperature anomaly between sex and among 
ecoregions. The conditional R2 value of the best model for P. fremontii was 0.47.
To estimate the variation in phenological sensitivity between first leaf unfolding 
and first open flower dates within each species, we fitted a separate linear mixed-­
effect model to the NPN observational data. The fixed component of the initial model 
(i.e., full model) included latitude, elevation, the climate anomalies of mean maxi-
mum spring temperature and precipitation in spring, and the interactions between 
the anomalies. The random component in the model included a random intercept 
term and a random slope term of temperature anomaly for each species and pheno-
phase. The conditional R2 value of the best model of NPN phenological data was 0.58.
Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) values of the resulting models were eval-
uated to further optimize the fixed component in the model. Models with the 
lowest AIC value and simplest structure (i.e., smaller number of variables) were 
selected as the final (best) model. All explanatory variables were centered and 
scaled to a mean value of zero and a SD of one to avoid bias in model develop-
ment with variables on different scales. The absolute correlation coefficient values 
among all predictors in the best models ranged from 0.003 to 0.54, limiting the 
effect of multicollinearity and overfitting (66). The variance inflation factor values 
of all variables in the best models ranged from 1 to 1.52, lower than the stringent 
threshold 3 defined in ref. 67 for avoiding issues of collinearity among variables.
Future Predictions. To increase our understanding of how continuous climate 
change in the future will alter the phenological shifts of the Populus spp. between 
sex and among regions, we used the best models to predict their flowering phe-
nology across two 30-­y time periods (2041 to 2070 and 2071 to 2100) and 
two shared socioeconomic pathway (SSPs) scenarios (SSP2-­4.5 and SSP5-­8.5). 
SSP2-­4.5 assumes middle of the road development with medium challenges 
to mitigation and adaptation, which may be the most realistic development 
trajectory, while SSP5-­8.5 represents fossil-­fueled development with high chal-
lenges to mitigation and low challenges to adaptation, as the low-­effort baseline 
(68, 69). Future predictions under these two scenarios offer a range of references 
for climate impact assessment on species interactions. Future climate projections 
data from 8 CMIP6 GCM ensembles for two 30-­y time periods under the two 
SSPs scenarios were obtained from ClimateNA. To evaluate how phenology will 
shift in the future, we used the best models fitted above to estimate the current 
female and male flowering phenology of seven species as a baseline using 30-­y 
historical normals (1981 to 2010) (70, 71). Differences in phenology between 
current and future predictions were calculated for each species by subtracting the 
estimated dates from the predicted dates at each ecoregion. The temporal gap 
between the sexes of each species was calculated under both current climatic 
conditions and future conditions under two different socioeconomic pathways. 
Changes in interphase temporal gaps were calculated by subtracting the gaps 
at current climate normal from the predicted gaps in the future. As the historical 
normal gap size can vary among ecoregions, we calculated the proportion of 
changes in the temporal gaps between sex for each species among ecoregions, 
to facilitate comparisons with future predictions. The same approach was used 
to predict the future changes of two phenophases (first open flower and first leaf 
out dates) of four species and the gaps between phenophases for the same two 
30-­y time periods under two climate change scenarios.
Results
Sex-­Dependent Phenological Responses to Climate. Male 
flowering phenology was consistently earlier than that of females 
across all eight species (Fig. 2). With the exception of P. fremontii, 
the timing of flowering was significantly affected by latitude, 
elevation, temperature, and precipitation in spring. Specifically, 
earlier flowering was associated with lower latitude, lower elevation, 
higher maximum temperature, and lower precipitation in spring 
(Table 1). Male flowering phenology exhibited stronger sensitivity 
to changes in temperature than female flowering phenology across 
all species (Fig. 3A) except P. fremontii as explained below. On 
average, the phenological sensitivity of male and female flowers 
to temperature was –2.2 d/°C and –1.6 d/°C, respectively. 
Phenological sensitivity to changes in spring temperature also 
varied among ecoregions within the species’ geographic ranges 
(SI Appendix, Fig. S2). The degree of variation in phenological 
sensitivity among species was not significantly larger [t (14) = 
–0.72, P = 0.48, 95% CI (–0.40, 0.20)] than the variation among 
ecoregions within each species’ ranges (Fig. 3B).
In the case of P. fremontii, the best model included significant 
effects of elevation and winter precipitation on flowering phenol­
ogy (SI Appendix, Table S1). Advanced flowering time in 
P. fremontii was associated with lower elevation and higher degrees 
of winter precipitation. In contrast to other species, we did not 
find significant variations in phenological sensitivity between male 
and female flowers or across the geographic range of P. fremontii.
To evaluate how future climate change may alter the relative 
flowering times of male and female plants, we made phenological 
predictions for the seven species with varied phenological sensitiv­
ities to warming between male and female flowering. Increased 
temporal gaps between male and female flowering time were pre­
dicted for most ecoregions and species for two 30-­y time periods 
(2041 to 2070 and 2071 to 2100) under two climate change sce­
narios (SSP2-­4.5 and SSP5-­8.5; SI Appendix, Figs. S3 and S4). The 
specific degrees of change in flowering time gaps between males and 
females varied across species and ecoregions, ranging from −5 to 
+11 d with the average changes ranging from an increase of 2 to 6 
d under the highest warming scenario (SSP5-­8.5), compared to the 
model predicted baseline (1981 to 2010). Greater phenological 
shifts were predicted under the scenario with greater warming 
(SSP5-­8.5; SI Appendix, Fig. S5). On average, the time between 
male and female flowering was predicted to increase by 10% across 
the seven species’ geographic ranges with 90% of predictions rang­
ing from 8 to 28% increases (Fig. 4).
Phenophase-­Dependent Phenological Responses to Climate. 
Phenological observations made by community scientists showed 
that flowering consistently started earlier than leaf out across the 
four species for which we had data (Fig. 5A). Both the onset 
of flowering and leaf out were significantly affected by latitude, 
elevation, maximum spring temperature anomaly, and spring 
precipitation anomaly (SI Appendix, Table S2). Advanced first 
open flower and first leaf out dates were associated with lower 
latitude and elevation, higher maximum spring temperature, and 
higher spring precipitation. In addition, phenological sensitivity to 
maximum spring temperature varied between the two phenophases 
and among four species. First open flower date was more sensitive 
to change in maximum spring temperature than first leaf out date 
in all four species (Fig. 5B).
Increases in the temporal gaps between the first open flower date 
and first leaf out date were predicted for all four species for the future 
time periods 2041 to 2070 and 2071 to 2100 (SI Appendix, Figs. S6 
and S7). The gap between the two phenophases was predicted to 
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by UCOP University of California Office of the President on April 1, 2025 from IP address 128.48.53.147.
PNAS  2023  Vol. 120  No. 48  e2306723120
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2306723120   5 of 9
increase by 0.4 to 10 d (SI Appendix, Fig. S7) across these species, 
corresponding to increases of 4 to 52% (Fig. 6). Greater increases 
were predicted under the scenario with stronger warming. Under 
the highest emission scenario (SSP5-­8.5), the gap was predicted to 
increase from 1 to 10 d across four species (SI Appendix, Fig. S7). 
P. balsamifera was estimated to have the greatest increase in the gap 
between first open flower and first leaf out dates among four species 
in the future, while the smallest increase was predicted for 
P. deltoides.
Discussion
Species can vary greatly in their phenological sensitivity to climate. 
Several studies have documented or predicted climate change-­
driven phenological mismatches among interacting species (7, 
72–74). However, less is known about how different phenophases 
vary in their sensitivity to climate within the same species. In 
particular, we know little about variation in the phenological 
responses of wind-­pollinated dioecious species and how they differ 
among phenological events (i.e., male flowering, female flowering, 
and leaf-­out). Our analyses revealed significant inter-­ and intra-­
specific variation in phenological sensitivity to climate across sexes 
and phenophases in Populus species.
Phenological Sensitivity to Temperature Varies within and 
among Species. We found similar degrees of inter-­ and intra-­
specific variation in the phenological sensitivity of flowering, 
which is consistent with the findings from prior studies focused 
on biotically pollinated plants (9). Wind-­pollinated species tend to 
exhibit shorter, more locally synchronous flowering times (24, 25). 
To overcome the particular problems associated with anemophily, 
it has been suggested that wind-­pollinated plants may benefit from 
the mass release of pollen on specific environmental cues (21, 75). 
Interspecific overlap in flowering time may be more common 
in wind-­pollinated species as they need to track environmental 
conditions facultative to pollen dispersal (e.g., windy, dry) but 
do not compete for pollination services (76). Further, there is 
pressure to release pollen when physical obstacles are limited—i.e., 
before leaf out and canopy closure (21, 77). Therefore, flowering 
phenology in wind-­pollinated plants has been expected to show 
locally adapted intrapopulation synchronization (21, 24, 25). Our 
results demonstrate the existence of large variation in phenological 
sensitivity to climate across species’ ranges, which indicates a high 
degree of specificity in how the time of flowering responds to 
climate. It has been suggested that the sensitivity of flowering 
phenology correlates with long-­term climatic conditions, with 
some studies arguing that sensitivity tends to be greater in colder 
areas where growing seasons are shorter and thus advantageous 
to reproduce as soon as possible (78), and others finding greater 
sensitivity in warmer, more humid regions where climatic cues 
are more reliable and the risks associated with flowering early are 
lower (9). We did not, however, find any statistically significant 
associations between the degree of phenological sensitivity to 
temperature and the regional climate within the species’ ranges. 
Further exploration of environmental factors related to wind 
pollination may help us better understand the distribution of 
phenological sensitivity across wind-­pollinated species’ ranges.
Males Flower Earlier and Are More Phenologically Sensitive to 
Changes in Temperature. Our results suggest that Populus males 
generally flower earlier and are more phenological sensitive to changes 
Fig.  2. Boxplots of flowering dates between sex (female and male) for 
eight species determined from digitized herbarium specimens. Species were 
ordered by mean flowering date.
Table 1. Unstandardized coefficients and SEs of fixed 
variables estimated by the best model of flowering time 
of male and female flowers from herbarium specimens 
for seven Populus species
Factor
Coefficient ± SE
P-­value
Latitude
4.8 ± 0.8
<0.001
Elevation
10.9 ± 0.6
<0.001
Tmax_sp_anm*
−4.7 ± 0.6
<0.001
PPT_sp_anm†
1.2 ± 0.4
0.009
*Tmax_sp_anm represents the anomaly of mean maximum temperature in spring (°C).
†PPT_sp_anm represents the proportional anomaly of precipitation in spring.
Fig.  3. Estimated phenological sensitivities and variance. (A) The SD of 
phenological sensitivity among species and within each species among Level 
II ecoregions. (B) Phenological sensitivity of flowering to spring maximum 
temperature anomaly across sexes (F: female and M: male) among seven 
Populus species. Negative values indicate advancement with warming. Species 
were ordered by mean flowering date.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by UCOP University of California Office of the President on April 1, 2025 from IP address 128.48.53.147.
6 of 9   https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2306723120
pnas.org
in climate. Though our specimen data are more likely to represent 
collections during peak flowering (79), the timing of peak flowering 
has been demonstrated to correlate strongly with the beginning of 
flowering and have significant effects on reproductive interactions 
(80, 81). Also, leaf out preceded flowering in only 19% of the 437 
instances of NPN records where flowering and leaf out were observed 
for the same Populus individual in the same year. Further, male-­first 
flowering in Populus spp. has been frequently documented in the field 
(42, 82–86). The earlier flowering of males has been associated with 
several factors, including competition among males for pollination 
opportunities (87); earlier seed emergence (88); and faster growth 
rates (89, 90); though these studies were mostly focused on animal-­
pollinated dioecious species. In the reproduction of dioecious species 
such as Populus spp., the investment gain of fitness should be mate-­
limited in males and resource-­limited in females (91–93). This is 
because the reproductive investment of males is mainly restricted to 
flowering, whereas that of females extends to embryo development 
and dispersal. Given this disparity in reproductive investment, we 
may expect males of dioecious plants to be more abundant than 
females and bloom earlier to maximize their chances of successful 
reproduction (94–96). Females, on the other hand, may be more 
averse to risk and adapted to flower once i) climatic conditions 
for reproduction are safely met and ii) pollen availability is not of 
concern. Higher phenological sensitivity to temperature in female 
flowers can be detrimental to reproductive success, as i) warm periods 
may often be followed by periods of dramatic chilling in temperate 
regions which can cause floral damage (97), and flowering times can 
advance faster than the end of the frost season in response to warming 
(98–101); and ii) females may flower ahead of males when pollen 
is not available. Alternatively, in the face of rapid climate change, 
it is possible that females' lesser ability to track climatic variability 
could result in lowered fitness, as species that do not closely track 
changes in climate have been suggested to exhibit lower reproductive 
success, growth, productivity, and abundance compared to those that 
do (102, 103). We did not, however, find significant responses to 
temperature or differences in phenological sensitivity among male 
and female flowers of P. fremontti. Instead, winter precipitation was 
the climatic factor with the largest effect on the flowering time of 
this species, which supports findings from previous studies (61, 62). 
This may be related to the intensive drought and high temperatures 
prevalent in the species’ range in the southwestern United States 
resulting in a shorter window of time for reproduction, which may 
select strongly for more synchronous flowering among sexes during 
this limited time (61, 104, 105). Interestingly, the specimens we 
examined comprised significantly more females than males. This 
may be due to collection bias in herbarium specimens that favors 
female individuals (14). Along these lines, the targeted collection/
observation of male individuals can help reduce this bias and further 
Fig. 4. Boxplot of proportional changes in temporal gap between male and female flowering time predicted for seven species across their ranges for two 30-­y 
future time periods (2041 to 2070 and 2071 to 2100) under two climate change scenarios (SSP2-­4.5 and SSP5-­8.5). Species were ordered by the median value 
of the proportional changes.
Fig. 5. Community science phenology observations and phenological sensitivity of four Populus species. (A) First leaf out and first open flower date of four 
species in the United States. (B) Estimated phenological sensitivities of two phenophases of four species to change in maximum spring temperature. Species 
were ordered by mean flowering date.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by UCOP University of California Office of the President on April 1, 2025 from IP address 128.48.53.147.
PNAS  2023  Vol. 120  No. 48  e2306723120
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2306723120   7 of 9
our understanding of intersexual variation in phenological responses 
in wind-­pollinated plants.
Climate Change will Alter Phenological Gaps among Sexes and 
Phenophases. Climate is not predicted to change consistently 
across species’ ranges, and phenological responses to this change 
will vary greatly among and within species. For instance, previous 
studies have suggested that climate change may prolong or shorten 
the time between leaf-­out and flowering (37, 38) and increase 
the time between the flowering of cooccurring congeneric species 
(4, 106). Temporal synchrony among sexes is important for 
effective reproduction, particularly in dioecious, wind-­pollinated 
plant species as they rely upon a nonspecific vector and the 
probability of successful pollination greatly decreases once leaves 
emerge (21, 23, 107). Our results suggest that sexual variation 
in phenological sensitivity will cause increases in the temporal 
gaps between male and female flowering times of Populus species 
in response to warming in spring. The predicted divergence 
in flowering time among sexes are driven by higher degrees of 
phenological sensitivity to temperature in male flowering. Though 
temporal overlap in flowering times does not directly translate into 
successful pollination, reduction in flowering synchrony increases 
pollen limitation by decreasing pollen availability during the time 
females are receptive and will likely result in lowered reproductive 
success, especially given the relatively short pollen longevity and 
pollination periods of wind-­pollinated species such as Populus spp. 
(22, 85, 108). Further, shifts in the timing of pollen dispersal may 
also affect other interacting organisms, such as bee species, which 
have been shown to collect Populus pollen (109, 110), as insects 
can display different phenological responses to changes in climate 
from the plants they rely upon (7).
Another factor that influences pollination success is the relative 
timing of flowering vs. leaf-­out. This is especially the case when 
flowering occurs prior to leaf development, as leaves function as a 
physical deterrent to pollen dispersal and reception—both those on 
the same plant and others (21, 111). Our results suggest that the 
temporal gap between flowering and leaf-­out in Populus species will 
increase with climate change. We expect that this interphase increase 
itself will not negatively affect the probability of reproductive success, 
as it will likely translate into longer window of time during which 
pollen can be dispersed unobstructed. However, the net effect of 
temporal divergence between sexes and phenophases on pollination 
efficacy is uncertain. Along these lines, other factors, including flow­
ering duration, pollen viability, intrapopulation phenological vari­
ability, and their responses to climate must be considered to ascertain 
the true reproductive cost of phenological divergence among sexes 
and phenophases (94). Further, studies of sexual differences in dio­
ecious plants should also consider resource investment across the 
entire reproductive season, and not just flowering (112).
Finally, as these shifts in phenology are also predicted to vary across 
species, they may result in altered degrees of inter-­specific competition 
and gene flow (31, 90, 113). Many Populus species have overlapping 
ranges and can hybridize (114). Given their reliance upon a nonspe­
cific pollination vector, interspecific variation in their reproductive 
phenology may be critical for maintaining species boundaries. Along 
these lines, it has been suggested that flowering time displacement 
could be common in wind-­pollinated plants (115–117). Hete­
rogenous phenological shifts across species and their ranges will likely 
result in altered patterns of phenological divergence/convergence 
among cooccurring congeneric taxa and hybridization rates.
Harnessing Natural History Collections and Community Obser­
vations. As our study builds upon herbarium specimens and 
community science observations that were not originally intended for 
phenological research, our results may be affected by the gaps and 
biases that these data inherently comprise (118, 119). For instance, 
herbarium collections can be geographically biased towards population 
centers and the sex ratios represented within herbarium collections 
may not accurately reflect those in the field (14, 118). In general, 
we had fewer observations of male flowering, and sampling efforts 
were likely not equal across the entirety of species’ ranges. While we 
limited our analyses to well-­collected species for which large amounts 
of data (n > 500) were available and removed duplicates and outliers 
to minimize such issues, our results are only as reliable as the data they 
are based upon. In addition, it is possible that biases in the collection of 
male vs female individuals due to differences in abundance, longevity, 
conspicuousness, or collector preference, may have affected our results 
(14). For example, the persistence and collection of unreceptive 
female flowers that have not yet visibly started the transition to fruit 
can potentially influence estimates of flowering phenology, especially 
when focusing on the period during which pollination is possible. 
Further study is needed to investigate the effects of such collecting 
biases on phenological estimations. Community science observations 
can harbor biases as well. For instance, observation frequency can be 
variable and biased toward weekends, and the duration of participation 
can vary greatly across volunteers (120, 121). NPN provides extensive 
training materials and specific guidelines for making phenological 
observations, and local phenology projects often provide additional 
hands-­on training and support. Still, there can be some variation in how 
different community scientists perceive and document phenological 
events (122, 123). Thus, with additional data, it is possible that our 
results may change. Along these lines, ensuring that individuals and 
Fig. 6. Boxplot of proportional change in temporal gaps between first open flower and first leaf out dates predicted for four Populus species across observation 
sites in the United States for two 30-­y future time periods (2041 to 2070 and 2071 to 2100) under two climate change scenarios (SSP2-­4.5 and SSP5-­8.5). Species 
were ordered by the median value of the proportional changes.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by UCOP University of California Office of the President on April 1, 2025 from IP address 128.48.53.147.
8 of 9   https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2306723120
pnas.org
organs representing both sexes are collected/surveyed and labelled 
accordingly would greatly facilitate future research into sexual 
variation in phenological responses. Nonetheless, previous studies have 
demonstrated that specimen-­derived phenological trends are not likely 
to be systematically biased and are compatible with those derived from 
field surveys (79, 124). Further, the consistent patterns we observe 
across species and their ranges suggest that these patterns are real.
Harnessing the power of natural history collections and com­
munity science, we show that plant phenology and its sensitivity 
to environmental cues can vary across and within species and 
between sex and phenophases in wind-­pollinated dioecious spe­
cies. This variation will likely manifest as increased temporal gaps 
between male and female flowering and flowering and leafing, the 
magnitude of which will vary across species’ ranges. Our study 
demonstrates the importance of considering multiple dimensions 
of inter-­ and intra-­specific variation when predicting phenological 
responses to climate change.
Data, Materials, and Software Availability. Digitized herbarium specimen 
data from iDigBio and GBIF used in the study are publicly available through 
iDigBio (43) and GBIF (44, 45). Data and R code used in this study are available 
on Zenodo (125).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We express gratitude to the many collectors and cura-
tors of biodiversity data who made this research possible. The following herbaria 
contributed invaluable data to this work: A, AASU, ACAD, ANHC, ASC, ASU, AWC, 
BALT, BBLM, BCH, BDI, BHMH/BHCB/MCCA, BHSC, BLM, BOIS, BOON, BPBM, 
BR, BRFC, BRIT, BROWN, BSN, BUF, BUT, CA.UBC, CALBG, CALVIN, CANB, CAS, 
CATA, CAU, CCSU, CDA, CHRB, CHSC, CIC, CLARK-­A, CLEMS, CM, CMC, CMN, CNS, 
COCO, COLO, CRMO, CS, CSLA, CSUSB, CTES/SI, DAV, DBG, DES, DOV, DS, DSUND, 
ECON, EDOBLM, EIU, EKY, EMC, ENCB-­IPN, ENLC, ENMU, ETSU, EWU, F, FH, FLAS, 
FLD, FSC, FSU, FTG, GA, GAS, GEO, GH, GMDRC, GMUF, GRCH, GVSC, HCHM, 
HJAEF, HLSD, HPC, HPL, HPSU, HSC, HUDC, IAC, ID, IDS, ILLS, IND, INPA, IRVC, 
ISTC, JBRJ, JEPS, JOTR, JROH, KIRI, KNK, KSP, KSTC, KU, LA, LCDI, LD, LEA, LFCC, 
LINF, LOB, LSU, LSUS, M, MA, MAINE, MARY, MASS, MCA, MEM, MESA, MICH, 
MIN, MISS, MISSA, MMNS, MNA, MNHN, MO, MOAR, MONT, MONTU, MOR, 
MOVC, MPM, MSC, MSUB, MSUNH, MTMG, MUHW, MVSC, MW, MWCF, MWI, 
NAVA, NCSC, NCSM, NCU, NCZP, NEBC, NEON, NHA, NHI, NHMUK, NMMNHS, 
NO, NPS, NY, O, OBI, ODU, PASA, PEMB, PERTH, PGM, PH, PLU, POM, PRC, PSM, 
PUL, QUC/ULF/QEF/QFS/QFA, REED, RENO, RMBL, RSA, S, SAU, SBAC, SBBG, SCFS, 
SCIR, SD, SDSU, SENEY, SFV, SIM, SJNM, SJSU, SNM, SOC, SRP, SUU, SWRS, TAC, 
TAWES, TENN, TEX, TLU, TRH, TTC, UAAH, UACH, UAM, UC, UCAC, UCD, UCJEPS, 
UCONN, UCR, UCS, UCSB, UCSC, UFPR, UFRGS, UNA, UNB, UNCA, UNCC, UNESP-­
IBB, UNISON, UNM, US, USCH, USF, USFS, USFS/BHSC, USFWS, USMS, USP, USU, 
UT, UTC, UTEP, UVSC, UWSP, VALE, VSC, VT, VVC, W, WASH, WCSU, WCUH, WCW, 
WET, WEWO, WGCH, WIN, WIS, WSCH, WSTC, WTU, WU, YM-­YOSE, YPM, and Z. 
We also thank Daniel Potter and David Boufford for generously sharing their 
botanical knowledge of wind-­pollinated dioecious plants. Finally, we thank the 
anonymous reviewers for taking the time and effort necessary to review and 
improve the manuscript.
Author affiliations: aDepartment of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, 
IN 47907; bPurdue Center for Plant Biology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907; 
cDepartment of Biological Sciences, Northern Kentucky University, Highland Heights, 
KY 41099; and dDepartment of Botany and Plant Pathology, Purdue University, West 
Lafayette, IN 47907
1.	
J. T. Anderson, D. W. Inouye, A. M. McKinney, R. I. Colautti, T. Mitchell-­Olds, Phenotypic plasticity and 
adaptive evolution contribute to advancing flowering phenology in response to climate change. 
Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 279, 3843–3852 (2012).
2.	
A. Menzel, T. H. Sparks, N. Estrella, D. B. Roy, Altered geographic and temporal variability in 
phenology in response to climate change. Glob. Ecol. Biogeogr. 15, 498–504 (2006).
3.	
K. Fuccillo Battle et al., Citizen science across two centuries reveals phenological change among 
plant species and functional groups in the Northeastern US. J. Ecol. 110, 1757–1774 (2022).
4.	
D. S. Park, I. K. Breckheimer, A. M. Ellison, G. M. Lyra, C. C. Davis, Phenological displacement is 
uncommon among sympatric angiosperms. New Phytol. 233, 1466–1478 (2022).
5.	
D. A. Springate, P. X. Kover, Plant responses to elevated temperatures: A field study on phenological 
sensitivity and fitness responses to simulated climate warming. Glob. Change Biol. 20, 456–465 (2013).
6.	
C. G. Willis, B. Ruhfel, R. B. Primack, A. J. Miller-­Rushing, C. C. Davis, Phylogenetic patterns of 
species loss in Thoreau’s woods are driven by climate change. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105, 
17029–17033 (2008).
7.	
Y. Xie, H. T. Thammavong, D. S. Park, The ecological implications of intra-­ and inter-­species variation 
in phenological sensitivity. New Phytol. 236, 760–773 (2022).
8.	
N. L. R. Love, S. J. Mazer, Region-­specific phenological sensitivities and rates of climate warming 
generate divergent temporal shifts in flowering date across a species’ range. Am. J. Bot. 108, 
1873–1888 (2021).
9.	
D. S. Park et al., Herbarium specimens reveal substantial and unexpected variation in phenological 
sensitivity across the eastern United States. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 374, 20170394 (2019).
10.	 I. W. Park, S. J. Mazer, Climate affects the rate at which species successively flower: Capturing an 
emergent property of regional floras. Glob. Ecol. Biogeogr. 28, 1078–1092 (2019).
11.	 K. D. Pearson, N. L. R. Love, T. Ramirez-­Parada, S. J. Mazer, J. M. Yost, Phenological trends in the 
California poppy (Eschscholzia californica): Digitized herbarium specimens reveal intraspecific 
variation in the sensitivity of flowering date to climate change. Madroño 68, 343–359 (2021).
12.	 A. H. Fitter, R. S. R. Fitter, Rapid changes in flowering time in British plants. Science 296, 1689–1691 
(2002).
13.	 C. Ziello, A. Böck, N. Estrella, D. Ankerst, A. Menzel, First flowering of wind-­pollinated species with 
the greatest phenological advances in Europe. Ecography 35, 1017–1023 (2012).
14.	 Y. Yang, J. M. Heberling, R. B. Primack, B. R. Lee, Herbarium specimens may provide biased 
flowering phenology estimates for dioecious species. Int. J. Plant Sci. 183, 777–783 (2022).
15.	 J. C. Vamosi, S. P. Otto, S. C. H. Barrett, Phylogenetic analysis of the ecological correlates of dioecy in 
angiosperms. J. Evol. Biol. 16, 1006–1018 (2003).
16.	 M. J. Velasco-­Jiménez, M. Arenas, P. Alcázar, C. Galán, E. Domínguez-­Vilches, Aerobiological and 
phenological study of Pistacia in Córdoba city (Spain). Sci. Total Environ. 505, 1036–1042 (2015).
17.	 E. Weryszko-­Chmielewska et al., Changes in the pollen seasons of Acer spp. in Lublin, central-­
eastern Poland, in 2001–2015. Acta Agrobot. 69, 1–13 (2016).
18.	 C. C. Davis et al., A new method for counting reproductive structures in digitized herbarium 
specimens using Mask R-­CNN. Front. Plant Sci. 11, 1129 (2020).
19.	 C. G. Willis et al., CrowdCurio: An online crowdsourcing platform to facilitate climate change studies 
using herbarium specimens. New Phytol. 215, 479–488 (2017).
20.	 M. Bogdziewicz, M. Pesendorfer, E. E. Crone, C. Pérez-­Izquierdo, R. Bonal, Flowering synchrony 
drives reproductive success in a wind-­pollinated tree. Ecol. Lett. 23, 1820–1826 (2020).
21.	 D. R. Whitehead, Wind pollination in the angiosperms: Evolutionary and environmental 
considerations. Evolution 23, 28–35 (1969).
22.	 W.-­N. Bai, Y.-­F. Zeng, W.-­J. Liao, D.-­Y. Zhang, Flowering phenology and wind-­pollination efficacy of 
heterodichogamous Juglans mandshurica (Juglandaceae). Ann. Bot. 98, 397–402 (2006).
23.	 S. G. Michalski, W. Durka, Synchronous pulsed flowering: Analysis of the flowering phenology in 
Juncus (Juncaceae). Ann. Bot. 100, 1271–1285 (2007).
24.	 K. Bolmgren, O. Eriksson, H. P. Linder, Contrasting flowering phenology and species richness in 
abiotically and biotically pollinated angiosperms. Evolution 57, 2001–2011 (2003).
25.	 D. Rabinowitz et al., Phenological properties of wind-­ and insect-­pollinated prairie plants. Ecology 
62, 49–56 (1981).
26.	 S. C. H. Barrett, J. Hough, Sexual dimorphism in flowering plants. J. Exp. Bot. 64, 67–82 (2013).
27.	 C. Darwin, On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation of Favoured 
Races in the Struggle for Life (John Murray, 1859).
28.	 D. G. Lloyd, C. J. Webb, Secondary sex characters in plants. Bot. Rev. 43, 177–216 (1977).
29.	 S. S. Renner, R. E. Ricklefs, Dioecy and its correlates in the flowering plants. Am. J. Bot. 82, 596–606 (1995).
30.	 L. F. Delph, Y. Lu, L. D. Jayne, Patterns of resource allocation in a dioecious Carex (Cyperaceae). Am. J. 
Bot. 80, 607–615 (1993).
31.	 J. R. K. Forrest, Plant size, sexual selection, and the evolution of protandry in dioecious plants. Am. 
Nat. 184, 338–351 (2014).
32.	 W. K. Petry et al., Sex-­specific responses to climate change in plants alter population sex ratio and 
performance. Science 353, 69–71 (2016).
33.	 B. Charlesworth, Effective population size and patterns of molecular evolution and variation. Nat. 
Rev. Genet. 10, 195–205 (2009).
34.	 D. J. Rankin, H. Kokko, Do males matter? The role of males in population dynamics. Oikos 116, 
335–348 (2007).
35.	 N. J. Fokkema, The effect of pollen in the phyllosphere of rye on colonization by saprophytic fungi and on 
infection by Helminthosporium sativum and other leaf pathogens. Neth. J. Plant Pathol. 77, 1–60 (1971).
36.	 K. Krzywinski, The tauber pollen trap, a discussion of its usefulness in pollen deposition studies. 
Grana 16, 147–148 (1977).
37.	 Q. Ma, J.-­G. Huang, H. Hänninen, X. Li, F. Berninger, Climate warming prolongs the time interval 
between leaf-­out and flowering in temperate trees: Effects of chilling, forcing and photoperiod.  
J. Ecol. 109, 1319–1330 (2021).
38.	 D. M. Buonaiuto, E. M. Wolkovich, Differences between flower and leaf phenological responses to 
environmental variation drive shifts in spring phenological sequences of temperate woody plants.  
J. Ecol. 109, 2922–2933 (2021).
39.	 G. T. Slavov, P. Zhelev, "SAlient biological features, systematics, and genetic variation of Populus" in 
Genetics and Genomics of Populus, Plant Genetics and Genomics: Crops and Models, S. Jansson, R. 
Bhalerao, A. Groover, Eds. (Springer, 2010), pp. 15–38.
40.	 M. C. Grant, J. B. Mitton, Elevational gradients in adult sex ratios and sexual differentiation in 
vegetative growth rates of Populus tremuloides Michx. Evolution 33, 914–918 (1979).
41.	 P. Mirski, Spatio-­temporal dynamics of sex structure in trioecious and dioecious populations of Salix 
myrsinifolia. Folia Geobot. 51, 39–49 (2016).
42.	 J. Braatne, S. Rood, P. Heilman, “Life history, ecology, and reproduction of riparian cottonwoods in 
North America” in Biology of Populus and Its Implications for Management and Conservation, R. F. 
Stettler, H. D. Bradshaw, P. E. Heilman, T. M. Hinckley, Eds. (NRC Research Press, 1996), pp. 57–85.
43.	 Integrated Digitized Biocollections (iDigBio), 14,801 records for Populus spp. in United States. 
iDigBio data. http://s.idigbio.org/idigbio-­downloads/81f5c61f-­4c95-­467a-­b237-­46fde589d55f.
zip. Accessed 11 February 2021.
44.	 Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF), Populus spp. occurrence data in North America. GBIF 
data. https://doi.org/10.15468/dl.k8zeq6. Accessed 3 March 2022.
45.	 Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF), Populus spp. occurrence data in Canada and United 
States. GBIF data. https://doi.org/10.15468/dl.a2a348. Accessed 20 June 2022.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by UCOP University of California Office of the President on April 1, 2025 from IP address 128.48.53.147.
PNAS  2023  Vol. 120  No. 48  e2306723120
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2306723120   9 of 9
46.	 J. Benhadi-­Marín, A conceptual framework to deal with outliers in ecology. Biodivers. Conserv. 27, 
3295–3300 (2018).
47.	 P. Dostál, J. Müllerová, P. Pyšek, J. Pergl, T. Klinerová, The impact of an invasive plant changes over 
time. Ecol. Lett. 16, 1277–1284 (2013).
48.	 C. M. Salgado, C. Azevedo, H. Proença, S. M. Vieira, “Noise versus outliers” in Secondary Analysis of 
Electronic Health Records, MIT Critical Data, Ed. (Springer International Publishing, 2016), pp. 163–183.
49.	 E. G. Denny et al., Standardized phenology monitoring methods to track plant and animal activity 
for science and resource management applications. Int. J. Biometeorol. 58, 591–601 (2014).
50.	 K. K. Fuccillo, T. M. Crimmins, C. E. de Rivera, T. S. Elder, Assessing accuracy in citizen science-­based 
plant phenology monitoring. Int. J. Biometeorol. 59, 917–926 (2014).
51.	 K. L. Gerst, N. L. Rossington, S. J. Mazer, Phenological responsiveness to climate differs among four 
species of Quercus in North America. J. Ecol. 105, 1610–1622 (2017).
52.	 D. S. Park, Y. Xie, H. T. Thammavong, R. Tulaiha, X. Feng, Artificial hotspot occurrence inventory 
(AHOI). J. Biogeogr. 50, 441–449 (2023).
53.	 D. S. Park, C. C. Davis, Implications and alternatives of assigning climate data to geographical 
centroids. J. Biogeogr. 44, 2188–2198 (2017).
54.	 D. N. Karger, N. E. Zimmermann, CHELSAcruts–High resolution temperature and precipitation 
timeseries for the 20th century and beyond. EnviDat (2018). https://doi.org/10.16904/envidat.159 
(Accessed 15 April 2022).
55.	 D. N. Karger et al., Climatologies at high resolution for the earth’s land surface areas. Sci. Data 4, 
170122 (2017).
56.	 T. Wang, A. Hamann, D. Spittlehouse, C. Carroll, Locally downscaled and spatially customizable 
climate data for historical and future periods for North America. PLoS One 11, e0156720 (2016).
57.	 R. B. Primack, J. Laube, A. S. Gallinat, A. Menzel, From observations to experiments in phenology 
research: Investigating climate change impacts on trees and shrubs using dormant twigs. Ann. Bot. 
116, 889–897 (2015).
58.	 D. F. B. Flynn, E. M. Wolkovich, Temperature and photoperiod drive spring phenology across all 
species in a temperate forest community. New Phytol. 219, 1353–1362 (2018).
59.	 C. Körner, D. Basler, Phenology under global warming. Science 327, 1461–1462 (2010).
60.	 S. J. Mazer, N. L. R. Love, I. W. Park, T. Ramirez-­Parada, E. R. Matthews, Phenological sensitivities to 
climate are similar in two Clarkia congeners: Indirect evidience for facilitation, convergence, niche 
conservatisim, or genetic contrains. Madroño 68, 388–405 (2021).
61.	 S. A. Cushman et al., Landscape genetic connectivity in a riparian foundation tree is jointly driven by 
climatic gradients and river networks. Ecol. Appl. 24, 1000–1014 (2014).
62.	 D. H. Ikeda et al., Genetically informed ecological niche models improve climate change predictions. 
Glob. Change Biol. 23, 164–176 (2017).
63.	 E. G. Beaubien, H. J. Freeland, Spring phenology trends in Alberta, Canada: Links to ocean 
temperature. Int. J. Biometeorol. 44, 53–59 (2000).
64.	 B. W. Blonder et al., Climate lags and genetics determine phenology in quaking aspen (Populus 
tremuloides). New Phytol. 238, 2313–2328 (2023), 10.1111/nph.18850.
65.	 J. M. Omernik, G. E. Griffith, Ecoregions of the conterminous United States: Evolution of a 
hierarchical spatial framework. Environ. Manage. 54, 1249–1266 (2014).
66.	 C. F. Dormann et al., Collinearity: A review of methods to deal with it and a simulation study 
evaluating their performance. Ecography 36, 27–46 (2013).
67.	 A. F. Zuur, E. N. Ieno, C. S. Elphick, A protocol for data exploration to avoid common statistical 
problems. Methods Ecol. Evol. 1, 3–14 (2010).
68.	 M. Meinshausen et al., The shared socio-­economic pathway (SSP) greenhouse gas concentrations 
and their extensions to 2500. Geosci. Model Dev. 13, 3571–3605 (2020).
69.	 K. Riahi et al., The Shared Socioeconomic Pathways and their energy, land use, and greenhouse gas 
emissions implications: An overview. Glob. Environ. Change 42, 153–168 (2017).
70.	 D. N. Laskin et al., Advances in phenology are conserved across scale in present and future climates. 
Nat. Clim. Change 9, 419–425 (2019).
71.	 J. Tao, R. Man, Q.-­L. Dang, Earlier and more variable spring phenology projected for eastern 
Canadian boreal and temperate forests with climate warming. Trees For. People 6, 100127 
(2021).
72.	 H. M. Kharouba, M. Vellend, Flowering time of butterfly nectar food plants is more sensitive to 
temperature than the timing of butterfly adult flight. J. Anim. Ecol. 84, 1311–1321 (2015).
73.	 S. J. Mayor et al., Increasing phenological asynchrony between spring green-­up and arrival of 
migratory birds. Sci. Rep. 7, 1902 (2017).
74.	 S. S. Renner, C. M. Zohner, Climate change and phenological mismatch in trophic interactions 
among plants, insects, and vertebrates. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Evol. Syst. 49, 165–182 (2018).
75.	 K. Faegri, L. Van Der Pijl, Principles of Pollination Ecology (Pergamon Press, 1979) (March 13, 2023).
76.	 T. M. Culley, S. G. Weller, A. K. Sakai, The evolution of wind pollination in angiosperms. Trends Ecol. 
Evol. 17, 361–369 (2002).
77.	 B. Heinrich, Flowering phenologies: Bog, woodland, and disturbed habitats. Ecology 57, 890–899 
(1976).
78.	 J. Prevéy et al., Greater temperature sensitivity of plant phenology at colder sites: Implications for 
convergence across northern latitudes. Glob. Change Biol. 23, 2660–2671 (2017).
79.	 C. C. Davis, C. G. Willis, B. Connolly, C. Kelly, A. M. Ellison, Herbarium records are reliable sources 
of phenological change driven by climate and provide novel insights into species’ phenological 
cueing mechanisms. Am. J. Bot. 102, 1599–1609 (2015).
80.	 B. C. Husband, D. W. Schemske, Ecological mechanisms of reproductive isolation between diploid 
and tetraploid Chamerion angustifolium. J. Ecol. 88, 689–701 (2000).
81.	 S. L. Nuismer, B. M. Cunningham, Selection for phenotypic divergence between diploid and 
autotetraploid Hecuchera grossulariifolia. Evolution 59, 1928–1935 (2005).
82.	 A. V. Broeck, K. Cox, P. Quataert, E. van Bockstaele, J. van Slycken, Flowering phenology of Populus 
nigra L., P. nigra cv. italica and P. x canadensis Moench. and the potential for natural hybridisation in 
Belgium. Silvae Genet. 52, 280–283 (2003).
83.	 A. Engstrom, Growing cottonwood from seed. J. For. 46, 130–132 (1948).
84.	 K. A. Simonin, “Populus angustifolia” in Fire Effects Information System [Online] (U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory, Fort Collins, 
CO, USA, 2001).
85.	 R. E. Farmer Jr., J. A. Pitcher, "Pollen handling for Southern hardwoods" in Pollen Management 
Handbook, United States. Dept. of Agriculture. Agriculture Handbook, E. C. Franklin, Ed. (U.S. Dept. of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, 1981), pp. 77–83.
86.	 D. Cooper, D. F. Van Haverbeke, “Eastern cottonwood” in Silvics of North America, Vol. 2, Hardwoods, 
R. M. Burns, B. H. Honkala, Eds. (Agriculture Handbook, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Southern Research Station, 1990).
87.	 A. G. Stephenson, R. I. Bertin, “Male competition, female choice, and sexual selection in plants” in 
Pollination Biology, L. Real, Eds. (Academic Press, New York, 1983), pp. 109–149.
88.	 C. B. Purrington, J. Schmitt, Consequences of sexually dimorphic timing of emergence and 
flowering in Silene latifolia. J. Ecol. 86, 397–404 (1998).
89.	 T. Elmqvist, R. G. Cates, J. K. Harper, H. Gardfjell, Flowering in males and females of a Utah willow, 
salix rigida and effects on growth, tannins, phenolic glycosides and sugars. Oikos 61, 65–72 (1991).
90.	 V. A. Krischik, R. F. Denno, Differences in environmental response between the sexes of the dioecious 
shrub, Baccharis halimifolia (Compositae). Oecologia 83, 176–181 (1990).
91.	 M. Andersson, Y. Iwasa, Sexual selection. Trends Ecol. Evol. 11, 53–58 (1996).
92.	 E. L. Charnoy, The Theory of Sex Allocation (Princeton University Press, 1982).
93.	 M. A. Munguia-­Rosas, J. Ollerton, V. Parra-­Tabla, Phenotypic selection on flowering phenology and 
size in two dioecious plant species with different pollen vectors. Plant Species Biol. 26, 205–212 
(2011).
94.	 Z. Li, X. Zhang, Y. Zheng, A. Qiu, L. Zhang, Effects of temperature on flowering phenological traits of 
Populus euphratica Oliv. and Populus pruinosa Schrenk populations, Xinjiang, China. J. Arid Land 
11, 754–763 (2019).
95.	 I. O. Skogsmyr, Å. S. A. Lankinen, Sexual selection: An evolutionary force in plants? Biol. Rev. Camb. 
Philos. Soc. 77, 537–562 (2002).
96.	 M. L. Stanton, Male-­male competition during pollination in plant populations. Am. Nat. 144, 
S40–S68 (1994).
97.	 D. W. Inouye, Effects of climate change on phenology, frost damage, and floral abundance of 
montane wildflowers. Ecology 89, 353–362 (2008).
98.	 C. K. Augspurger, Reconstructing patterns of temperature, phenology, and frost damage over 124 
years: Spring damage risk is increasing. Ecology 94, 41–50 (2013).
99.	 E. Eccel, R. Rea, A. Caffarra, A. Crisci, Risk of spring frost to apple production under future climate 
scenarios: The role of phenological acclimation. Int. J. Biometeorol. 53, 273–286 (2009).
100.	H. Hoffmann, T. Rath, Future bloom and blossom frost risk for Malus domestica considering climate 
model and impact model uncertainties. PLoS One 8, e75033 (2013).
101.	D. S. Park, Y. Xie, A. M. Ellison, G. M. Lyra, C. C. Davis, Complex climate-­mediated effects of 
urbanization on plant reproductive phenology and frost risk. New Phytol. 239, 2153–2165 (2023), 
10.1111/nph.18893.
102.	E. E. Cleland et al., Phenological tracking enables positive species responses to climate change. 
Ecology 93, 1765–1771 (2012).
103.	C. G. Willis et al., Favorable climate change response explains non-­native species’ success in 
Thoreau’s woods. PLoS One 5, e8878 (2010).
104.	H. F. Cooper et al., Climate-­driven divergent selection in a foundation tree species: QST-­FST 
evidence from multiple common gardens. Authorea [Preprint] (2021). https://doi.org/10.22541/
au.161273878.82956729/v1 (Accessed 17 April 2023).
105.	H. F. Cooper et al., Genotypic variation in phenological plasticity: Reciprocal common gardens 
reveal adaptive responses to warmer springs but not to fall frost. Glob. Change Biol. 25, 187–200 
(2019).
106.	M. F. Willson, Sexual selection in plants. Am. Nat. 113, 777–790 (1979).
107.	M. Millerón et al., Effect of canopy closure on pollen dispersal in a wind-­pollinated species (Fagus 
sylvatica L.). Plant Ecol. 213, 1715–1728 (2012).
108.	N. Wheeler et al., Polymix breeding with paternity analysis in Populus: A test for differential 
reproductive success (DRS) among pollen donors. Tree Genet. Genomes 2, 53–60 (2006).
109.	M. E. Saunders, Insect pollinators collect pollen from wind-­pollinated plants: Implications for 
pollination ecology and sustainable agriculture. Insect Conserv. Divers. 11, 13–31 (2018).
110.	A. D. Synge, Pollen collection by honeybees (Apis mellifera). J. Anim. Ecol. 16, 122–138 (1947).
111.	F. Di-­Giovanni, P. M. Beckett, J. R. Flenley, Modelling of dispersion and deposition of tree pollen 
within a forest canopy. Grana 28, 129–139 (1989).
112.	M. M. Espirito-­Santo et al., Sexual differences in reproductive phenology and their consequences for 
the demography of Baccharis dracunculifolia (Asteraceae), a dioecious tropical shrub. Ann. Bot. 91, 
13–19 (2003).
113.	Y. Zhang, W. Lin, C. Chu, M. Ni, Sex-­specific outbreeding advantages and sexual dimorphism in the 
seedlings of dioecious trees. Am. J. Bot. 110, e16153 (2023). 10.1002/ajb2.16153.
114.	 J. E. K. Cooke, S. B. Rood, Trees of the people: The growing science of poplars in Canada and 
worldwide. Can. J. Bot. 85, 1103–1110 (2007). This commentary is one of a selection of papers 
published in the Special Issue on Poplar Research in Canada.
115.	R. Hopkins, Reinforcement in plants. New Phytol. 197, 1095–1103 (2013).
116.	T. McNeilly, J. Antonovics, Evolution in closely adjacent plant populations IV. Barriers to gene flow. 
Heredity 23, 205–218 (1968).
117.	V. Savolainen et al., Sympatric speciation in palms on an oceanic island. Nature 441, 210–213 
(2006).
118.	B. H. Daru et al., Widespread sampling biases in herbaria revealed from large-­scale digitization. 
New Phytol. 217, 939–955 (2018).
119.	G. J. Di Cecco et al., Observing the observers: How participants contribute data to iNaturalist and 
implications for biodiversity science. BioScience 71, 1179–1188 (2021).
120.	T. Crimmins et al., Science and management advancements made possible by the USA National 
phenology network’s nature’s notebook platform. BioScience 72, 908–920 (2022).
121.	 J. R. Courter, R. J. Johnson, C. M. Stuyck, B. A. Lang, E. W. Kaiser, Weekend bias in Citizen Science data 
reporting: Implications for phenology studies. Int. J. Biometeorol. 57, 715–720 (2013).
122.	C. McDonough MacKenzie, G. Murray, R. Primack, D. Weihrauch, Lessons from citizen science: 
Assessing volunteer-­collected plant phenology data with Mountain Watch. Biol. Conserv. 208, 
121–126 (2017).
123.	R. E. Feldman, I. Žemaitė, A. J. Miller-­Rushing, How training citizen scientists affects the accuracy 
and precision of phenological data. Int. J. Biometeorol. 62, 1421–1435 (2018).
124.	D. Primack, C. Imbres, R. B. Primack, A. J. Miller-­Rushing, P. Del Tredici, Herbarium specimens 
demonstrate earlier flowering times in response to warming in Boston. Am. J. Bot. 91, 1260–1264 
(2004).
125.	 Y. Xie, YingyingXie16/Populus_phenology: Published version of R code and data for Populus Phenology 
project (v1.0). Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8411975. Deposited 4 October 2023.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by UCOP University of California Office of the President on April 1, 2025 from IP address 128.48.53.147.
