Ecological Indicators 129 (2021) 107934
Available online 5 July 2021
1470-160X/Crown
Copyright
©
2021
Published
by
Elsevier
Ltd.
This
is
an
open
access
article
under
the
Open
Government
License
(OGL)
(http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3/).
Overwinter sea-ice characteristics important for Antarctic krill recruitment 
in the southwest Atlantic 
Devi Veytia a,*, Sophie Bestley a,b, So Kawaguchi b,c, Klaus M. Meiners b,c, Eugene J. Murphy d, 
Alexander D. Fraser b, Kazuya Kusahara e, Noriaki Kimura f, Stuart Corney a 
a Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies, University of Tasmania, 20 Castray Esp., Hobart, Tasmania 7000, Australia 
b Australian Antarctic Program Partnership, Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies, University of Tasmania, Hobart, Tasmania 7004, Australia 
c Australian Antarctic Division, Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment, 203 Channel Highway, Kingston, Tasmania 7050, Australia 
d British Antarctic Survey, High Cross, Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 0ET, UK 
e Japan Agency for Marine Earth Science and Technology (JAMSTEC), Yokohama, Kanagawa 236-0001, Japan 
f Atmosphere and Ocean Research Institute, The University of Tokyo, 5-1-5 Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa 277-8568, Japan   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Climate change 
Sea ice 
Antarctic krill 
Euphausia superba 
Overwinter survival 
Recruitment 
A B S T R A C T   
Climate change alters the extent and structure of sea-ice environments, which affects how they function as a 
habitat for polar species. Identifying sea-ice characteristics that serve as indicators of habitat quality will be 
crucial to the monitoring and management of climate change impacts. In the Southern Ocean, Antarctic krill is a 
key prey species and fishery target. Krill larvae depend upon sea-ice habitats to survive the winter and recruit to 
the population in spring. Existing observations of sea-ice characteristics lack sufficient spatiotemporal coverage 
to quantify which ones contribute to favourable overwintering habitat, leading to uncertainties in how current 
and future changes in sea ice affect krill populations. Here, we derive regional-scale indices of annual krill 
recruitment spanning 35 years across the southwest Atlantic. To develop meaningful indicators of sea-ice habitat, 
we selected variables from a high-resolution sea-ice model that are hypothesized as relevant for larval habitat 
use. The resulting correlations between recruitment and sea-ice indicators vary by region and show remote 
connections to sea ice that correspond with established theories of larval transport. Through an improved rep­
resentation of sea-ice habitat quality, as compared with using more traditional satellite-derived variables such as 
sea-ice extent and duration, we highlight plausible regions of overwintering habitat. Our findings improve 
current understanding of how krill are likely responding to changing sea ice and support emerging views that 
larval habitat use is complex. Furthermore, regional variation in larval dependence on sea ice may provide 
pockets of resilience to change for the broader krill population.   
1. Introduction 
Sea ice is highly sensitive to global warming with profound conse­
quences for polar species and ecosystems (Maksym, 2019; Meredith 
et al., 2019). As many management strategies rely on the capacity to 
quickly diagnose ecosystem state, identifying indicators of sea-ice 
habitat quality is a priority. Developing these sea-ice indicators would 
require quantifying how variation in sea-ice characteristics determines 
habitat quality for dependent species. 
In the Southern Ocean, Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba, hereafter 
krill) are an integral part of the marine ecosystem and are dependent on 
sea ice during their early life stages. They are a primary prey source 
supporting a diverse assemblage of marine predators including whales, 
seals, penguins and flying seabirds (Murphy et al., 2007a, 2016; Trathan 
and Hill, 2016). They also play a role in nutrient cycling (Cavan et al., 
2019; Schmidt et al., 2011) and are the target of the Southern Ocean’s 
largest (and growing) fishery (Nicol and Foster, 2016). 
Environmental variation, including sea-ice variability, drives large 
fluctuations in krill biomass on regional and interannual scales (Murphy 
et al., 2007b), which exerts a bottom-up control on the population dy­
namics of local and migratory dependant predators (Croxall et al., 1999; 
Trathan and Hill, 2016). Krill recruitment (i.e. the survival of larvae 
until they are one year old) is likely a significant driver of interannual 
krill abundance and population dynamics (Murphy et al., 1998; Quetin 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: devi.veytia@utas.edu.au (D. Veytia).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Ecological Indicators 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ecolind 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2021.107934 
Received 11 March 2021; Received in revised form 12 June 2021; Accepted 25 June 2021   
Ecological Indicators 129 (2021) 107934
2
and Ross, 2003; Siegel and Loeb, 1995). Quantifying the drivers of krill 
recruitment variability is therefore of key importance to understanding 
ecosystem-level impacts of climate variability and change, as well as 
informing conservation measures in the Southern Ocean. 
Overwinter survival is thought to constrain krill recruitment 
(Atkinson et al., 2004; Siegel and Loeb, 1995). Larval krill feed primarily 
on phytoplankton and cannot survive prolonged periods of starvation 
(Yoshida et al., 2009), yet in winter pelagic phytoplankton growth is 
severely limited by light, caused by the high latitude, sea-ice cover and 
deep vertical mixing (Arrigo and Thomas, 2004; Boyd, 2002). Sea-ice 
algae, however, can thrive close to the increased light availability at 
the top of the water column as well as concentrated nutrients (Arrigo, 
2014). Observational studies indicate that krill larvae may have evolved 
an overwintering strategy reliant on sea-ice habitats. Larvae have been 
observed scraping sea-ice algae from under-ice surfaces (Hamner et al., 
1989) and sea-ice algae have been identified as a critical diet component 
(Daly, 1990; Ju and Harvey, 2004; Kohlbach et al., 2017; Meyer et al., 
2002; Schmidt et al., 2014). Caverns created under ridged sea ice may 
also provide refuge from currents (Daly, 1990; Meyer, 2012; Meyer 
et al., 2009). These findings were synthesized into the general concep­
tual model of sea ice functioning as an important foraging substrate and 
refuge to support overwinter larval survival (Nicol, 2006). 
Emerging studies find regional plasticity in larval reliance on sea ice. 
In the Weddell Sea, larval diets were found to be composed of hetero­
trophic and autotrophic components from both the water column and 
sea ice, and larval growth was maximized in the dynamic marginal ice 
zone (MIZ) rather than the interior pack ice as previously thought 
(Meyer et al., 2017). Results from other diet studies show that larvae can 
opportunistically feed on dietary sources from the water column (both 
under the sea ice and in the open ocean) to meet their energetic re­
quirements (Daly, 1990, 2004; Jia et al., 2016; Walsh et al., 2020). 
From a mechanistic perspective, local-scale studies indicate that sea- 
ice habitat quality may be characterized by a range of variables: thick­
ness and snow cover to optimize the growth of sea-ice bottom algae 
communities (Jeffery et al., 2020; Meiners et al., 2012; Wongpan et al., 
2018), ridging (i.e. deformed sea ice) to provide refuge, and dynamism, 
as seen in the MIZ (Massom et al., 2006; Meyer et al., 2017). In addition, 
at large scales larvae are likely advected as passive drifters over winter. 
The most recent theory regarding larval overwinter transport is that 
larvae are advected in association with sea ice during the day and with 
surface currents at night (Meyer et al., 2017). If sea-ice characteristics 
are indicators of habitat quality, then recruitment measured in the 
spring/summer would be related to sea ice along the preceding winter’s 
transport pathways (Kohlbach et al., 2017). The environmental condi­
tions that determine larval overwinter habitat therefore operate over 
large spatiotemporal scales. However, these theories are based on local- 
scale studies and cannot be confidently extrapolated to define larger- 
scale relationships. While mesoscale sea ice sampling methods using 
autonomous underwater vehicles or under-ice trawls as well as aerial 
observations provide an important stepping stone to link local studies to 
broader scales of inquiry (e.g. Castellani et al., 2020; David et al., 2016; 
Flores et al., 2012; Schaafsma et al., 2016), achieving the necessary 
large-scale spatiotemporal characterisation of relevant sea-ice variables 
requires satellite remote sensing. 
Until recently, sea-ice concentration (SIC) was the most widely used 
remotely sensed sea-ice characteristic, likely due to its good daily tem­
poral coverage and validation. More dynamically driven sea-ice char­
acteristics (such as deformations created from ridging, snow-cover, and 
swell) are difficult to detect remotely with legacy instruments. Large- 
scale maps of variables such as thickness have been interpolated from 
networks of in-situ measurements (Worby et al., 2008). However, 
interpolation cannot provide sufficient accuracy and temporal resolu­
tion for the purposes of ecological modelling, and these measurements 
are time-consuming and costly to collect. While technologies to obtain 
remote measurements of other sea-ice characteristics such as thickness 
and snow cover are in their nascent stage, the time series of these 
measurements is not as long. 
A shortened record of satellite data can reduce statistical power to 
detect relationships with krill recruitment. Recruitment indices across 
larger scales are calculated from net tow data, which are compiled 
opportunistically using the KRILLBASE databases (Atkinson et al., 
2017). This results in a noisy time series that is fragmented in space and 
time. To detect a signal across a noisy time series, increased statistical 
power and thus length of time series is needed. These restrictions in­
fluence the scope of studies quantifying the effects of changing sea ice on 
recruitment. 
Past analyses have been based on SIC and SIC-derived variables such 
as sea-ice extent (SIE), timing of advance (TOA), duration (DUR) and 
timing of retreat (TOR) (Stammerjohn et al., 2008; see Table 1 for 
commonly used abbreviations). From these, declining SIE (Atkinson 
et al., 2004; Kawaguchi and Satake, 1994; Mackintosh, 1972; Nicol 
et al., 2000; Quetin et al., 2007; Siegel and Loeb, 1995), timing (Pi˜nones 
and Fedorov, 2016; Quetin et al., 2007), as well as larger-scale climate 
modes that influence sea-ice dynamics, such as the Southern Annular 
Mode (SAM) (Atkinson et al., 2019; Saba et al., 2014) and El Ni˜no 
Southern Oscillation (ENSO) (Loeb and Santora, 2015) have been 
identified as influential for krill recruitment. 
The mechanisms that underpin the relationships between recruit­
ment and these sea-ice variables remain unclear. This gives us low 
confidence that these relationships will be maintained into a future 
driven by climate change (Cox et al., 2018; Saba et al., 2014). For 
example, extrapolating the relationship between krill density and SIE 
leads to a grim outlook for long-term krill population trajectories as 
circumpolar SIE is projected to decrease by ~ 30% by 2100 (Maksym, 
2019). However, when sea-ice thickness (SIT) and ridging rate (RR) are 
accounted for in projections, suitable larval habitat may indeed expand 
in the future (Melbourne-Thomas et al., 2016). To refine our hypotheses 
of how krill will respond to these variables in a changing climate, we 
need to quantify relationships between recruitment variability and sea- 
ice variables that reflect a more mechanistic understanding of habitat 
use and quality. 
Here, we use a sea-ice model to explore relationships between in­
dicators of sea-ice habitat quality and krill recruitment in the southwest 
Atlantic. This approach is useful for testing hypotheses on environ­
mental drivers of population dynamics within a quantitative framework. 
Our motivation is for this study to compliment and inform the applica­
tion of existing and emerging satellite products. To do this, we first 
develop a time series of regional-scale krill recruitment indices from krill 
density and length frequency data from net tows. This time series in­
corporates data spanning 35 years and resolves the entire southwest 
Atlantic – the population centre for krill (Atkinson et al., 2004) – at a 
regional scale. We also derive a suite of modern sea-ice indicators 
Table 1 
Commonly used abbreviations.  
Category 
Abbreviation 
Long Name 
Sea-ice variables 
SIE 
Sea-ice extent 
MIZ 
Marginal Ice Zone 
SIC 
Sea-ice concentration 
RR 
Ridging rate 
SIT 
Sea-ice thickness 
DUR 
Sea-ice duration (Stammerjohn 
et al., 2008) 
TOA 
Sea-ice time of arrival ( 
Stammerjohn et al., 2008) 
TOR 
Sea-ice time of retreat ( 
Stammerjohn et al., 2008) 
sd 
Standard deviation 
cv 
Coefficient of variation 
max 
Maximum 
Geographical and 
oceanographic features 
ACC 
Antarctic Circumpolar Current 
wAP 
western Antarctic Peninsula 
AP 
Antarctic Peninsula  
D. Veytia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Ecological Indicators 129 (2021) 107934
3
(Table 2) relevant to hypothesized mechanisms of sea ice influence on 
krill recruitment. Since such variables are not available from remote 
sensing with the requisite temporal coverage, we obtain estimates using 
output from a high-resolution coupled sea ice-ocean model. Maps of 
temporal correlations are then evaluated between krill recruitment and 
the sea-ice indicators, and the results compared with those obtained 
using more traditional sea-ice variables derived from satellite SIC. 
Through a more sophisticated representation of sea-ice habitat this 
study represents the first broad-scale analysis that enables a mechanistic 
understanding to inform the quantification of sea-ice habitat quality. 
This provides insight into both contemporary and future environmental 
drivers of krill recruitment, and hence the status of krill populations and 
the wider Southern Ocean ecosystem. 
2. Methods 
2.1. Study area 
Our study area (130 W to 25 W and 75 S to 50 S, Fig. 1) covers the 
southwest Atlantic and its oceanographically upstream regions (i.e. the 
Bellingshausen and Amundsen Seas). The southwest Atlantic contains 
>50% of the circumpolar krill biomass (Atkinson et al., 2009), which 
supports a rich community of krill predators (Trathan and Hill, 2016), as 
well as the entire contemporary krill fishing effort (Nicol and Foster, 
2016). This sector also has the best historical spatiotemporal research 
sampling coverage of net tows (e.g. KRILLBASE; (Atkinson et al., 2017)) 
providing krill length frequency datasets, which are concentrated along 
the western Antarctic Peninsula (wAP) and around South Georgia. 
2.2. Krill recruit density 
2.2.1. Data description: Krill density and length frequency 
Both krill density (number of krill under 1 m2 of sea surface) and 
length frequency (histogram of length measurements from individual 
krill) data were used to develop regional-scale recruitment indices for 
this study. Krill density data were retrieved from the KRILLBASE density 
database (hereafter “the density database”, https://www.bas.ac.uk 
/project/krillbase/), which is a freely-available database comprising 
net samples of krill over the Southern Ocean. Krill length frequency data 
were compiled from two sources. The KRILLBASE length frequency 
database is a similar data rescue project to the density database and 
comprises krill length frequency measurements, sampled from scientific 
and commercial hauls. To augment the KRILLBASE length frequency 
database, we combined its measurements with length frequency mea­
surements from the Palmer LTER study region spanning 2009–2016 
(Palmer Station Antarctica LTER and Steinberg, 2020). This combined 
dataset will hereafter be referred to as “the length-frequency database”. 
Since these databases are compiled from uncoordinated scientific 
cruises spanning a long time period (1926–2016), it is difficult to 
directly compare measurements that may have been taken with varying 
sampling methods. To minimize the influence of these differences in our 
analysis, we use the standardized krill density values which adjust 
measurements to a standard sampling method (Atkinson et al., 2017). To 
our knowledge no analogous standardization method exists for the 
length-frequency data, so no correction is applied. 
Measurements from both databases were subsequently filtered and 
binned to nine equal-area hexagonal polygon grid (green hexagons, 
Fig. 1). For more details on data filtering, preparation, and binning, see 
Appendix B.i. 
2.2.2. Deriving recruit density 
Recruit density is calculated by multiplying the mean krill density for 
each region and sampling season by the corresponding proportion of 1- 
year-old krill in the population (R1) (Atkinson et al., 2019; De la Mare, 
1994). Different methods exist to derive R1 from pooled length fre­
quency data, from classifying any krill measurements with a length 
between 15 and 30 mm as recruits (Atkinson et al., 2019; Perry et al., 
2019), to more complex methods utilising a mixture distribution (e.g. 
Bhattacharya, 1967; De la Mare, 1994; Macdonald and Pitcher, 1979). 
We decided to employ a mixture distribution, to recognize that at the 
regional scale of our analysis growth rates between our regions may vary 
and generate distinct length frequency distributions. Of the mixture 
Table 2 
Ecological significance and derivation of modern sea-ice indicator variables. All variables were calculated from model estimates of SIC, SIT or RR (daily timesteps).  
Variable Name 
Calculation Method 
Ecological Significance 
Jul-Aug max 
RR 
The maximum daily value of RR, calculated from all the days in 
July and August of each year. 
In July-August light remains too low to support photosynthesis, and therefore it is unlikely 
that sea ice supports a high enough ice algal bottom community growth to sustain larval krill 
(Meiners et al., 2012; Meyer, 2012, Fig. 5). This is supported by the low larval growth rates 
observed during midwinter (Supplementary Table 1 in Meyer et al., 2017). Rather, sea ice 
likely functions as a refuge. This would be characterized by over-rafted ice that provides a 
three-dimensionally complex environment for krill to shelter from predators and currents ( 
Meyer et al., 2009). Maximum RR is considered a better indicator of over-rafted ice rather 
than mean RR, as a large ridging event (e.g. a storm) would create the over-rafted structures 
that would then persist for some time. 
Jul-Aug mean- 
mode SIT 
The mean minus the mode values of SIT, calculated from all the 
days in July and August of each year. 
This metric serves as an additional approximation of deformed ice. The higher the difference 
of mean and mode thickness, the more the thickness distribution of ice has a right skew, 
indicating a higher degree of deformation and presence of thicker ridged ice (Haas, 2004). In 
a previous study, larvae were found to be abundant under ice with a high mean-mode 
(termed ice type 1) in both the pack ice and MIZ (Meyer et al., 2017). While in the previous 
study mean-mode was derived from spatial measurements, in this study the metric is 
calculated over time. We hypothesize that this approach is still valid, as ice that is highly 
deformed over time would likely also be deformed spatially. 
Sep MIZ 
coverage 
The percentage of days in September that a grid cell was classified 
as MIZ using the thresholds identified in the sensitivity analysis. 
In September, when there is more light to support ice algal growth (Meiners et al., 2012), we 
expect the most important ice qualities to be those that favour the creation of a structurally 
complex, food-rich habitat for krill to feed. Some observational evidence indicates that the 
MIZ, which is estimated to have some of the largest ice algae concentrations (Arrigo et al., 
1997), provides a superior grazing habitat for krill (Brierley et al., 2002; Meyer et al., 2017). 
Sep sd RR 
The sd of all the daily values of September RR, calculated for each 
year. 
Similarly to the MIZ, ice that supports higher food availability is likely dynamic, as processes 
such as grinding may release ice algae into the water column, making it more accessible ( 
Meyer et al., 2017; Walsh et al., 2020). 
Sep mean SIT 
The mean of all the daily values of September SIT, calculated for 
each year. 
SIT likely has a complex relationship with krill habitat quality. While excessively thick ice 
would attenuate the light available to sea ice bottom algal communities, maintaining a 
certain amount of thickness is likely key to optimizing habitat. Both algal bottom 
communities and larval grazing substrate would be maximized in thicker, deformed ice ( 
Meiners et al., 2012; Meyer et al., 2017).  
D. Veytia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Ecological Indicators 129 (2021) 107934
4
distribution methods, the Bhattacharya (1967) method has a unique 
quality in that the number of modes that the distribution fits is informed 
by the data itself, and not a pre-conceived growth model (which may 
have unknown regional variations). However, this requires that the user 
manually selects from the data where these modes occur and this is not 
entirely objective. We therefore decided to use the number of modes 
derived using the Bhattacharya (1967) method, along with their corre­
sponding means and standard deviations, to inform a Gaussian mixture 
distribution (Fig. 2). A resulting mode was determined to be a recruit if 
the mean was < 33 mm (Siegel, 2000). For each region and sampling 
season, the R1 was the sum of the proportions of all modes classified as 
recruits. 
Recruit density for each region and sampling season was then 
calculated by multiplying the corresponding mean krill density and R1 
values. To validate our new approaches to calculating R1, we compared 
the recruit density derived here with published values. Since existing 
time series of recruit density are pooled over the southwest Atlantic 
rather than by region (Fig. S1, Atkinson et al., 2019), a direct compar­
ison of interannual trends was not possible. An approximate comparison 
was done by fitting a simple log-linear regression to our regional recruit 
density by sampling season. For this comparison recruit density values 
to which Palmer LTER data contributed were removed, as these were not 
included in the Atkinson et al. (2019) time series. 
2.3. Evaluating and summarising sea-ice model output 
Here, as an initial exploration, we selected a single sea-ice model that 
has been shown to accurately reproduce key physical sea-ice properties 
(Kusahara et al., 2018, 2017, 2019). Multi-model ensemble approaches 
using Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)-class models 
(e.g. Veytia et al., 2020) are suitable for broad-brush approaches over 
larger spatio-temporal time scales, however they are not suitable for our 
purposes. For this study we require a model, providing daily output for a 
wide range of sea-ice variables, that has been tuned to represent sea-ice 
processes in the Southern Ocean. Publicly available IPCC-class models 
provide monthly output for a range of variables for every region of the 
Earth. Many of these models do not represent Southern Ocean sea ice 
accurately (Cavanagh et al., 2017) and even those that do only output a 
small selection of the possible variables that describe sea ice. Therefore, 
our single-model approach is appropriate to address the specific 
research questions posed in this paper. 
2.3.1. Data description: sea-ice model 
We obtained estimates of sea-ice concentration (SIC), sea-ice thick­
ness (SIT) and ridging rate (RR) (i.e. the rate of sea-ice convergence) 
from a high-resolution coupled ocean-sea ice model (v4.0, Hasumi, 
2006) with an ice shelf component (Kusahara and Hasumi, 2013), 
hereafter “the model”. The model outputs are the result of a hindcast 
simulation run from 1979 to 2016, with atmospheric surface boundary 
conditions from the global atmospheric reanalysis ERA-Interim (Dee 
et al., 2011). The model uses an irregular grid with a horizontal reso­
lution of 10–20 km in Antarctic coastal margins. Outputs are available in 
daily timesteps. Previous evaluations conclude that this model can 
effectively reproduce trends in Antarctic sea-ice extent (SIE) and SIC 
(Kusahara et al., 2018, 2017, 2019), as well as thickness in autumn – 
spring (winter was not evaluated) (Kusahara et al., 2019). 
The model output was summarised into two sets of sea-ice variables: 
“classic” and “modern”. Classic variables are traditionally calculated 
from SIC measurements, such as time of arrival (TOA), time of retreat 
(TOR) and duration (DUR). Our modern variables reflect sea-ice char­
acteristics hypothesized to be advantageous to larvae (Section 2.3.4). 
Most of these variables (i.e. those that are calculated from SIT or RR) are 
still new to remote sensing and thus a better temporal coverage can be 
achieved using estimates from the model. For compatibility with map­
ping packages, the daily output was remapped onto a regular grid over 
the study area, with a resolution similar to that of its native grid (14 km), 
using the lambert azimuthal equal-area projection. 
2.3.2. Data description: Remotely sensed sea-ice observations 
To compare the model output to available observations, we accessed 
output from two gridded satellite products to calculate: (1) the classic 
variables using daily 25 km SIC observations from the National Snow 
and Ice Data Centre (NSIDC, Cavalieri et al., 1996, updated yearly); and 
(2) climatologies of SIT for July-August and September using monthly 
SIT derived from Envisat and Cryosat-2 with a 50 km smoothing radius, 
distributed by the Archiving, Validation and Interpretation of Satellite 
Oceanographic (AVISO) data portal (Guerreiro et al., 2017). The AVISO 
product is available from 2003 and comprises 3 different sampling 
Fig. 1. Map of study area. This map highlights the recruitment regions in which krill density and length-frequency data were binned (green), as well as commonly 
referenced oceanographic features (white) and seas (yellow). The bathymetry and coastline raster was retrieved from the Blue Marble: Next Generation dataset, 
produced by the NASA Earth Observatory. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) 
D. Veytia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Ecological Indicators 129 (2021) 107934
5
methods (Fig. C.3). Where overlap between two sampling methods 
occurred, the most recent was used. 
2.3.3. Evaluating model against observations 
As an additional verification, we performed evaluations comparing 
modelled output of sea-ice variables with available satellite products. 
These included an evaluation of modelled SIC and the marginal ice zone 
(MIZ). The latter is important for our study, as previous work had hy­
pothesized the importance of the MIZ for krill habitat (Meyer et al., 
2017), and our choice of modern variables reflects this (Table 2). It is 
therefore crucial that the model represent the MIZ reasonably. A sensi­
tivity analysis (Appendix C.i) enabled us to provide a realistic MIZ 
representation in terms of area and location (Fig. 3). The model’s rep­
resentation of SIT was also evaluated against remotely sensed SIT (Ap­
pendix C.ii), which revealed that the model represented spatial patterns 
of SIT well. Although modelled SIT was lower than observed, it was close 
to the lower confidence limit of observed SIT and therefore within a 
reasonable range. Additionally, inter-instrument differences in the 
Antarctic are large (Fig. 3 in Kacimi and Kwok, 2020), giving relatively 
low confidence in the remotely-sensed product. 
2.3.4. Modern variables: Achieved through model output 
We developed a suite of modelled sea-ice variables providing a more 
mechanistic description of krill sea-ice habitat: we term these “modern” 
variables. These variables are available through use of sea-ice models, 
and/or reflect new perceptions of krill overwintering habitat. 
Recent work suggests that SIC, SIT and RR are likely important for 
describing larval habitat (Meiners et al., 2012; Melbourne-Thomas et al., 
2016; Meyer et al., 2017). In particular, the distribution of these vari­
ables was identified as important (Meyer et al., 2017). To characterize 
the distribution of SIC, SIT and RR, the daily model output for each was 
summarized into modern variables using the summary statistics. The 
summary statistics used included mean, standard deviation (sd) and 
coefficient of variation (cv, sd/mean) for all sea-ice variables, as well as 
the percentage of time (days) that a cell was classified as MIZ (% MIZ 
cover). Both the maximum RR and the mean-mode (i.e. mean minus 
mode) SIT were used as proxies for sea-ice deformation (i.e. under-ice 
habitat structural complexity). Previous work also hypothesizes that 
krill may alter their use of sea-ice habitat depending on the stage of the 
season (Meyer, 2012), so we summarised the daily model outputs for 
midwinter (Jul-Aug) and late winter (Sep) separately. 
2.4. Correlations between recruitment and sea ice variables 
To identify sea-ice drivers of krill recruitment, maps of temporal 
correlations were calculated between recruitment indices in key regions 
and the suite of modern sea-ice variables. Of these initial modern vari­
ables, five had the strongest magnitude and spatial area of correlations 
and also had support from literature (Table 2). We therefore focussed the 
analysis on these five. Using estimated sea-ice variables from the model 
brought new structure and definition to overwintering habitat compo­
sition (Fig. C.5-6). For comparison, correlations to the classic sea-ice 
variables (DUR, TOA and TOR) were also calculated. 
Maps of temporal correlations were generated by calculating the 
Pearson’s correlation between the time series of sea-ice variables within 
every model grid cell over the entire study area and the time series of log 
recruit density (excluding zero values) per hexagonal region. This 
resulted in a map of temporal correlation that had the same grid as the 
model. Zero values of log recruit density were excluded to avoid zero- 
inflation and over dispersion that would be caused by a high occur­
rence of seasons with an R1 (and thus recruit density) of zero. This raises 
the question of whether these zeros are “real” (i.e. does failing to sample 
a small size class truly reflect zero recruitment). It is more likely that 
these size classes were present but were not sampled. This issue requires 
a more in-depth analysis into how recruitment is inferred from length 
frequency data and is beyond the scope of this paper. 
As an indicator of which correlations are unlikely to have arisen by 
chance, we performed a permutation test. This involved iteratively 
shuffling the ordering of the recruitment time series and recalculating 
the map of temporal correlation to generate a frequency distribution of 
correlations that would result from the randomized data. This provides a 
random distribution of correlations against which to compare our 
observed correlations. If the observed correlations occur at the tail ends 
of the permuted distribution, they are more likely to be real. The per­
mutation test was performed 100 times for each sea-ice variable and 
recruitment region. We acknowledge that spatial autocorrelation and 
multiple testing may increase the chance of a type I error in spatial maps 
of temporal correlation and permutations. Therefore, we also summa­
rized permutated maps (which have the dimensions of the model grid) 
using two whole-of-area statistics: the mean of the absolute correlation 
for all the model grid cells, and the 95% quantile. Since these 
Fig. 2. The derivation of R1 from length frequency data. This method 
involved using a. the Bhattacharya method to inform b. a Gaussian mixture 
analysis. In a. an example of the Bhattacharya method mixture analysis is 
shown for the Bransfield region in 1994. The upper bar graph refers to the 
length-frequency distribution. The lower plot shows the sample calculation. 
Here the log of the data can be approximated by a parabola, which can be 
further simplified to a straight line by differencing. Thus, by plotting the log­
arithmic difference of each length frequency class against its midpoint, separate 
components can be identified by drawing straight lines through the data, as 
shown. In b. varying resulting R1 values (for cases where high, moderate and 
zero R1 values were calculated), are drawn in green over their original length- 
frequency distributions (S. Georgia E. in 1982, Bransfield in 1982 and Weddell 
N.E. in 2009 are shown as examples from left to right). (For interpretation of 
the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web 
version of this article.) 
D. Veytia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Ecological Indicators 129 (2021) 107934
6
summarized statistics required considerably less data storage, we were 
able to run 500 permutations for the whole-of-area statistics. 
2.5. Larval transport 
Finally, to provide context for the spatial correlations resulting from 
the above analysis and evaluate the prospect of remote connections, we 
also considered larval transport. 
2.5.1. Data description: Sea-ice and surface current velocities 
Sea-ice velocity fields were used to calculate back-trajectories of krill 
transport when sea ice was present. Previous analyses (e.g. Meyer et al., 
2017; Thorpe et al., 2007) have used the Polar Pathfinder daily 25 km 
resolution EASE-Grid sea-ice velocity vectors from the National Snow 
and Ice Data Center (NSIDC) (Tschudi et al., 2019). However recent 
evaluations of NSIDC velocities against buoy data have found mea­
surement artefacts that can significantly affect analysis results (Szanyi 
et al., 2016), as well as an underestimation of ice velocity (Sumata et al., 
2014). We therefore used sea-ice velocities calculated from the satellite 
microwave sensors AMSR-E and AMSR-II images using a method based 
on maximum cross correlation (Kimura and Wakatsuchi, 2011). This 
“Kimura” dataset is structured on a 60 km resolution grid in daily 
timesteps from 2003 to 2016. The Kimura dataset has reproduced sea- 
ice velocities in the Arctic with a high degree of accuracy when vali­
dated against buoy data (Kimura et al., 2013), although such a valida­
tion has yet to be done in the Southern Ocean. 
The ocean surface current velocity fields were produced by SSALTO/ 
DUACS and represent altimetry-derived dynamic topography heights 
and geostrophic velocities. This provides a measure of the mesoscale 
geostrophic component of flow. The product is available on a 1/4 grid 
in daily timesteps from 1993. 
2.5.2. Particle tracking 
To determine likely transport pathways, 15–20 (depending on the 
area covered by ocean) equally spaced points were laid in each 
recruitment region. For each of these points Lagrangian back- 
trajectories over the winter months were calculated from November 
30th to April 1st of the same year (Meyer et al., 2017), following the 
method of Tison et al. (2020). This was done for every year from 2003 to 
2016. The trajectories were updated in 12 h timesteps. When sea-ice 
velocity data was present, one timestep (12 h) of the day was advec­
ted with sea ice, and a second timestep was advected with under-ice 
surface currents. Since sea-ice cover inhibits the remote measurement 
of under-ice surface currents, they were estimated by scaling the 
magnitude of the altimetry-derived sea-ice velocity components by 0.43 
and applying an offset of −35 to the direction (Meyer et al., 2017). 
When sea-ice velocity data was absent, the particle was advected with 
surface currents for both timesteps. The position of the particle was 
recorded every 10th day of the simulation to thin the data. For more 
detail on the particle tracking method, see Appendix E. 
All analyses were performed in the R statistical computing environ­
ment (R Core Team, 2018). For packages used see Table A.1. 
3. Results 
3.1. Krill recruit density 
The krill data were processed to provide time series of mean krill 
density and pooled length frequency for nine polygons, termed 
“recruitment regions” (green hexagons in Fig. 1). Overall, these time 
series spanned from 1981 to 2016, but the sampling coverages available 
from the krill density and length-frequency databases varied by 
recruitment region (Tables B.1-2). Thus, these data supported calcula­
tions of proportional recruitment, krill density, and recruit density with 
variable temporal coverage (Fig. 4, Tables B.3–5). 
The interannual trend in log10-transformed recruit density calculated 
across our nine recruitment regions (−0.046 log10(recruit density no/ 
m2)/year, Pr>|t| = 8.87x10-3, adjusted R2 = 0.11, see Fig. B.1) was 
similar to a previously published trend calculated from data pooled 
across the southwest Atlantic (−0.070, P < 0.001, adjusted R2 = 0.39) 
Fig. 3. Validating COCO the modelled SIE and MIZ against NSIDC observations. Panel a. displays the similarity in SIE and MIZ location, showing SIC between 
NSIDC and COCO the model for September, averaged over 1979–2016. Red contours outline the MIZ along the 0.15 and 0.80 ice concentration fraction isolines in 
NSIDC, and the 0.9 < DO YOU MEAN 0.09? 0.9 doesn’t make sense!> and 0.92 isolines in COCOthe model. Panel b. validates how well COCO the model can 
reproduce interannual variation in SIE and MIZ area, using a monthly timeseries of SIE and MIZ area. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure 
legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) 
D. Veytia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Ecological Indicators 129 (2021) 107934
7
(Atkinson et al., 2019). As to be expected there was more noise around 
our model fit for regional recruit density. Since our model structure did 
not explicitly account for region, the variation due to region was un­
explained and resulted in a lower adjusted R2. 
3.2. Linking krill recruitment and sea ice 
3.2.1. Correlations with sea ice 
Our selection of modern variables revealed spatial distributions in 
sea-ice characteristics that could not have been identified from sea-ice 
concentration (SIC) observations alone (Fig. 5). Highlighted regions 
include the Weddell-Scotia Confluence, the southwestern Weddell Sea, 
coastal regions, and the ice edge. This allowed us to identify new pat­
terns of correlation with recruit density. 
To present the most rigorous findings we focused our results inter­
pretation on those correlations that were most likely to be real, arising 
from the three best-sampled recruitment regions, as a robust correlation 
analysis requires a well-populated time series. These regions were: wAP 
mid., Bransfield and S. Georgia E. (Figs. 1 and 4); the full correlation 
maps from the six lesser sampled recruitment regions are provided in 
Fig. D.1. To determine correlations unlikely to have arisen by chance the 
maps of temporal correlations were interpreted alongside the permu­
tation results (mapped in Fig. D.2, summarised by whole-of-area sta­
tistics in Fig. D.3). 
Maps of the temporal correlations and permutations revealed 
distinct, large areas where these sea-ice indicators correlated with 
regional recruit densities (Fig. 6, Fig. D.4-5). These areas were often not 
located in the same region from which the recruit density was derived, 
thus we termed these areas “remote connections”. Collated at the whole- 
of-area scale, permutation results indicated six cases where the modern 
sea-ice variables are very likely to provide real correlations with our 
regional-scale recruitment densities (Fig. D.3). These include wAP mid. 
recruitment correlating with Jul-Aug mean-mode sea-ice thickness 
(SIT), Jul-Aug maximum (max) ridging rate (RR) and Sep standard de­
viation (sd) of ridging rate (RR); Bransfield recruitment correlating with 
Sep marginal ice zone (MIZ) coverage; and S. Georgia E. recruitment 
correlating with Jul-Aug max RR and Sep MIZ coverage. Therefore, we 
are most confident in the maps of correlations and permutations that 
correspond to these particular sea-ice indicators. However these whole- 
of-area statistics can dilute signals from even fairly large-scale features 
which the permutation maps indicate to very likely be real (e.g. influ­
ence of Sep MIZ coverage for Bransfield recruitment, Figs. D.2 & D.4); 
their spatial size and coherence indicates a non-random phenomenon, so 
we have reasonable confidence to focus our presentation of remote 
connection results to the larger-scale features for our three best-sampled 
recruitment cells. 
Among the classic variables (Fig. 6), we found good correspondence 
between the correlation maps produced by the NSIDC and model data­
sets, indicating that the model could effectively reproduce the spatio­
temporal dynamics of SIC suitable for our study. Remote connections for 
the classic variables were generally small in area. In the cases of the wAP 
mid. and Bransfield regions, positive correlations extended eastward 
Fig. 4. Derived regional-scale time series of krill recruitment indices. R1 (proportion of 1-year-old krill in the population, green triangle) and recruit density 
(blue square) are plotted on their relevant link scale (i.e. logit-link for R1 and log-link for recruit density). Note the two indices are related as recruit density is R1 
weighted by the mean standardized krill density for that region and season. Seasons where sampling occurred but recruit density was zero are indicated by grey 
circles at the bottom of the graph. The sea ice correlation analysis focused on three of the best-sampled recruitment regions (outlined in red). (For interpretation of 
the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) 
D. Veytia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Ecological Indicators 129 (2021) 107934
8
(downstream), while negative correlations extended westward along the 
MIZ in the Bellingshausen and Amundsen Seas as well as occurring in the 
southwest corner of the Weddell Sea. For S. Georgia E. the remote 
connections were mostly positive and more dispersed, extending west­
ward from the Bransfield Strait and throughout part of the Weddell Sea. 
Remote connections identified using the modern modelled variables 
generally encompassed a larger area and highlighted different regions 
than the classic variables. For the wAP mid. these included a region of 
positive correlation spanning the Bellingshausen/Amundsen Seas, a 
positive correlation along the eastern peninsula (western Weddell Sea) 
and a negative correlation reflected in the greater Weddell Sea. A rela­
tively similar pattern was evident in the west (positive) and east 
(negative) of the study domain for the Bransfield region. S. Georgia E. 
showed strong negative correlations with sea ice in the western and 
southern areas of the Weddell Sea. In addition, a thin arc of positive 
correlation occurred along the northern ice edge extending westward 
(upstream) from S. Georgia along the South Scotia Ridge. While this 
appears to be a series of smaller elements, a holistic look at the sur­
rounding correlations reveals it is part of a larger ice-edge feature which 
spans all three modern sea-ice variables for September (i.e., MIZ 
coverage, mean SIT and sd RR; Fig. D.4). Albeit with less confidence, the 
continuity and spatial area suggest that it may indeed represent a real 
physical habitat feature. 
Finding remote connections with sea ice supports the theory that 
krill may associate with and be transported by sea ice. An exploration of 
sea-ice back trajectories is therefore needed to determine whether this 
explanation for the remote connection is likely, and if so, which remote 
connections are likely to have mechanistic drivers. 
3.2.2. Larval transport 
The larval transport analysis allows for the remote connections 
observed in the correlations to be interpreted through a mechanistic lens 
(Figs. 7 & E.1). These results indicate that recruitment in the wAP mid 
region may be, in part, driven by larval transport with sea ice from the 
Bellingshausen Sea. Similar inferences can be drawn between recruit­
ment in the Bransfield region and sea ice in the western Weddell Sea, as 
well as South Georgia and sea ice along the northern ice edge of the 
Scotia Sea. 
Fig. 5. Climatologies of key sea-ice habitat variables. These climatologies represent spatial averages of their respective variables, calculated from the model 
output from 1979 to 2016. For example, the map for Jul-Aug max RR represents an average of the maximum RR that occurred over July and August for each year. 
Each variable has been scaled from 0 to 1 so that they can be plotted on the same colour scale. Both Jul-Aug max RR and Sep sd RR maps have been capped at their 
95% quantiles; this was done so that extremely high values near the coast would not mask the structuring of RR values further offshore. 
D. Veytia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Ecological Indicators 129 (2021) 107934
9
4. Discussion 
The temporal correlations between regional recruit density and sea 
ice reveal remote connections which vary by recruitment region. These 
remote connections are often driven by multiple spatially overlapping 
sea-ice variables, but differ substantially depending on whether the sea- 
ice variables used were classic descriptors of sea-ice habitat (derived 
from observed SIC) or the modern variables (derived from sea-ice model 
output) developed within this study. Assuming the sea-ice variables 
represent real functional relationships between larvae and sea ice, then 
the remote connections should follow overwinter transport pathways 
from source regions to each recruitment region. We find that the remote 
connections derived from our modern sea-ice variables correspond well 
with overwinter larval transport, adding value to existing classic sea-ice 
variables in defining overwinter habitat quality. 
In S. Georgia E., recruitment studies generally conclude that the 
population is not self-sustaining, and that recruits are transported from 
elsewhere (Siegel and Watkins, 2016). Current understanding of krill 
transport to South Georgia supports the remote connections we found 
for S. Georgia E.. Transport studies have identified source populations 
for South Georgia, finding krill advected from the north-western Wed­
dell Sea by the Weddell Gyre or Weddell-Scotia Confluence, and from 
the wAP by the Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC) (Fach and Klinck, 
2006; Hofmann et al., 1998; Mackintosh, 1972; Marr, 1962; Meyer et al., 
2017; Murphy et al., 2004). The remote connections identified with 
classic variables tended to be smaller in area, but the identification of 
regions near the ice edge in the Bransfield Strait supports earlier findings 
that changes in SIE and timing may interact with ocean circulation to 
affect krill transport to South Georgia (Murphy et al., 2004, 1998; 
Thorpe et al., 2007). Remote connections with the modern variables 
were more extensive and displayed a more connected network of 
possible transport pathways. Most notable was the strong negative 
correlation in the western and southern Weddell Sea. This was driven 
mainly by July-August maximum (max) ridging rate (RR) and 
September mean sea-ice thickness (SIT), indicating that lower values of 
these variables are related to higher recruitment in South Georgia 
(Fig. D.4). A lower RR and SIT could indicate that the ice is diverging, 
which would be linked to higher export by the Weddell Gyre to South 
Georgia. This remote connection matches where krill likely originate in 
the Weddell Sea, assuming they arrive in the productive marginal ice 
zone (MIZ) along the South Scotia Ridge by mid-September (Meyer 
et al., 2017). Krill would then be capable of reaching South Georgia by 
December (~76–89 days, Murphy et al., 2004). Larval back-trajectories 
support these previously studied transport pathways, reinforcing the 
importance of the South Scotia Ridge. 
Furthermore, we found a semi-continuous arc of high positive cor­
relation along the South Scotia Ridge with S. Georgia E. recruitment. 
This may coincide with the eastward drift of the northern ice edge, 
transported by the ACC through the Drake Passage and across the Scotia 
Sea towards South Georgia. This is a well-evidenced transport route for 
krill to South Georgia (Fach and Klinck, 2006; Hofmann et al., 1998; 
Murphy et al., 2004, 1998; Thorpe et al., 2004). It is feasible that krill 
arriving in South Georgia by spring-summer are found along this route 
in mid-late winter. This remote connection also coincides with the MIZ 
and is evident within all our modern September sea-ice variables, which 
is when we expect the MIZ to be most important for krill recruitment. By 
providing a food-rich environment, transport associated with the MIZ 
may explain the larger krill lengths observed in South Georgia compared 
to upstream source regions (Fach et al., 2002; Siegel and Watkins, 2016). 
We also note this feature extends past the tip of the Antarctic Peninsula 
Fig. 6. New regions of high correlation between recruit density in main cells and modern sea ice variables. These maps compare correlations to (columns left 
to right): classic variables (DUR, TOA, TOR) calculated using NSIDC SIC observations; classic variables calculated using the modelled SIC output; the modern sea ice 
variables identified using the model (Table 2). Note that this therefore compares the overlay of 3 variables for the two left columns, and 5 variables for the right 
column. Coloured regions show where the observed correlation was at the tail ends of the permuted distribution, to the 10% level. For TOA, the sign of the cor­
relations is reversed, as an earlier (i.e. smaller) TOA results in longer DUR. Correlations for each of the variables are overlain with transparency, so each map 
represents a composite of the positive and negative correlations generated from each set of variables. Correlations are displayed for the three best-sampled 
recruitment regions. For maps that separate these high correlation areas into their component variables, see Fig. D.4-5. 
D. Veytia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Ecological Indicators 129 (2021) 107934
10
(AP), which includes key krill habitat in the South Shetland Islands and 
Bransfield Strait. Particle tracking using ocean transport has shown 
January krill may have come from as far as the South Shetland Islands in 
October (Murphy et al., 2004). Another study using velocities from 
surface drifting buoys suggested a transport time of 110 days, placing 
krill at the South Shetlands by mid-September (Ichii and Naganobu, 
1996). Our larval transport analysis agrees with these transport times 
(Fig. 7). This region was particularly highlighted by a positive correla­
tion with July-August mean-mode SIT (Fig. D.5). This indicator of sea- 
ice rugosity may suggest that sea ice in the South Shetland Islands and 
Bransfield Strait functions as a refuge for krill on their way to South 
Georgia in early winter. Thus, there may be true mechanistic links 
driving these feature, despite weaker correlations. 
In the western Antarctic Peninsula (wAP), the presence of the AP as a 
land barrier to the east dictates that incoming krill originate from the 
west, and sea-ice dynamics within the Amundsen and Bellingshausen 
Seas regions have been found to be important for explaining krill 
recruitment variability (Pi˜nones et al., 2013; Wiedenmann et al., 2009). 
The remote connections we identified using classic variables highlighted 
negative correlations with sea ice especially in the northern Amundsen 
Sea, which is inconsistent with existing evidence. They therefore seem 
less likely to represent plausible sea-ice habitat descriptors for krill 
recruiting in the wAP mid. The modern variables, however, identified a 
large remote connection (strong positive correlation) spanning both 
seas. This was located somewhat farther upstream than hypothesized 
source regions for the wAP (Pi˜nones et al., 2013), but previous particle 
tracking studies mainly considered only ocean currents for transport. 
Our larval transport analysis that incorporates sea ice indicates that the 
remote connections in the western Bellingshausen Sea are indeed 
feasible source regions for krill in the wAP mid. If longer transport times 
or an increased association with sea ice (which moves ~ 2x faster than 
surface currents) were to be considered, it is highly likely the Amundsen 
Sea would also be included. This agrees with studies showing that 
considering sea-ice transport can enhance the distance travelled (Meyer 
et al., 2017; Thorpe et al., 2007). Therefore, recruitment in the wAP mid 
region may be partially driven by transport through sea ice in the 
Amundsen and Bellingshausen seas. 
The positive remote connection spanning the Amundsen and Bel­
lingshausen seas was supported by the overlap of the three September 
sea-ice indicators (Fig. D.4). Together, these indicators suggest that 
thicker, more dynamic sea ice in these areas at the end of winter was 
most influential for high recruitment in the wAP mid. Such icescapes 
may result from dynamic processes such as storms that would contribute 
to sea ice thickening and ridging events. This would create over-rafted 
sea ice for refuge and more complex feeding substrate (Meyer et al., 
2017), as well as potentially release ice algae into the water column 
(Table 1). Sea ice habitat in the Amundsen and Bellingshausen seas may 
therefore provide important refuge and increased food availability 
during late winter for larvae en route to the wAP. 
Despite evidence for local origins of krill within the wAP (summar­
ised in Pi˜nones et al., 2013), neither set of variables (classic nor modern) 
identified high correlations with local sea-ice indicators (Fig D.5). This is 
possibly due to the shallow bathymetry in continental shelf areas that 
may provide a food-rich habitat which may facilitate diverse feeding 
strategies and reduce reliance on sea ice (Schmidt et al., 2014; Walsh 
et al., 2020). Shallow bathymetry has been assumed to limit successful 
spawning (Hofmann and Hüsrevo˘glu, 2003; Thorpe et al., 2019). Our 
findings may therefore indicate that the environmental conditions that 
interact to define good habitat within the shelf regions are complex and 
likely include more than just sea-ice processes. 
In the Bransfield region, Lagrangian particle tracking has identified 
diverse source regions, such as the Bellingshausen and western Weddell 
seas (Capella et al., 1992). Our larval transport analyses are consistent 
with this. The remote connections derived from classic and modern 
variables both highlighted some positive correlations upstream in the 
Bellingshausen Sea, but in general the correlations for Bransfield 
Fig. 7. Monthly distribution of krill source regions using sea-ice transport. Sea ice back-trajectories were calculated from November 30th of each year 
(2003–2016) at end locations indicated by the red dots. The progressive locations of the particles along the back-trajectories were recorded every 10 days. The 
resulting locations across all years were binned to a 4 × 2 degree grid. Grid cell counts represent the number of binned locations along a back-trajectory occurring in a 
given month (e.g. to show where particles that end up at a given location were in July, etc.). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the 
reader is referred to the web version of this article.) 
D. Veytia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Ecological Indicators 129 (2021) 107934
11
recruitment were weaker than those found for wAP mid. or S. Georgia E. 
(Fig. D.4). Some small negative correlations with September mean SIT 
and standard deviation (sd) RR in the western Weddell Sea may be 
linked to increased sea-ice divergence and export of krill into the 
Bransfield Strait. There were also localized positive correlations around 
the South Shetland Islands with most sea-ice indicators, particularly 
September mean SIT (Fig D.5). This could indicate a hotspot of impor­
tant habitat for larval overwintering around the South Shetland Islands. 
However, due to the small area of this feature it is difficult to validate 
this finding from current observations. These less conclusive findings 
may also reflect the emerging view that krill in this region have flexible 
overwintering strategies and are less reliant on sea-ice habitats. Alter­
natively, correlations could be masked by the diverse composition of 
krill in the Bransfield region, which reflects krill from different source 
regions and life histories. 
In addition to remote connections that have likely mechanistic 
drivers, we observed two predominant signals of climate modes within 
the remote connections. First was a dipole of positive correlations to the 
west of the AP and negative correlations to the east amongst the modern 
sea-ice variables for both the wAP mid. and Bransfield regions. Using 
inferences based on larval transport, we can attribute the western pos­
itive correlations to likely source regions, as well as correlations in the 
western Weddell Sea for the Bransfield region. We speculate that the 
remainder of the remote connections found in the Weddell Sea are likely 
the result of atmospheric correlations. This dipole invokes the patterns 
of large-scale atmospheric modes that operate in the area, such as the 
Pacific-South America mode (Mo and Higgins, 1998), the El Ni˜no 
Southern Oscillation (ENSO) (Turner, 2004), and zonal wave three 
(Raphael, 2007). These modes have been shown to have a strong in­
fluence on Antarctic sea-ice patterns (Murphy et al., 2014; Yuan and Li, 
2008), as well as correlate to larval growth and recruitment (Loeb and 
Santora, 2015; Massom and Stammerjohn, 2010; Massom et al., 2006). 
These climate modes may also play a role in a second climate-related 
pattern. This pattern was composed of negative remote connections 
extending westward from the AP along the MIZ and was formed by 
classic variables for the wAP mid. and Bransfield regions. This pattern is 
similar to that observed during a sea-ice compaction event. In these 
events, a quasi-stationary zonal wave three, along with a weak La Nina 
(in the 2005 event) or a positive Southern Annular Mode (2001/2 
events) were associated with atmospheric anomalies that drove persis­
tent north westerly winds (Massom et al., 2008, 2006). The deepening of 
the Amundsen Sea Low can drive such winds causing extreme ice 
compaction towards the coast in the Amundsen and Bellingshausen seas 
(Raphael et al., 2016). Such events resulted in earlier ice retreat (Mas­
som et al., 2008, 2006), which may explain why this signal is resolved by 
the classic sea-ice variables. Observations indicate that compaction 
events have negative impacts on larval growth and recruitment (Massom 
and Stammerjohn, 2010; Massom et al., 2006). We should then expect to 
see a positive correlation between the ice edge and krill recruitment 
(shorter ice coverage = lower recruitment) rather than the negative 
correlation observed. Yet these compaction events can also result in 
increased ice melt and primary production (Massom et al., 2006), as well 
as thicker ice and increased ridging near the coast (Massom et al., 2008, 
2006), which may create more favourable habitat from a mechanistic 
perspective. Thus, while these correlations may indicate an indirect 
mechanistic connection to krill recruitment and an importance of wAP 
compaction events, their influence on krill recruitment requires further 
exploration. 
5. Conclusions 
Overall, the correlations between recruit density and our modern 
sea-ice variables represent an improved approximation of krill over­
winter habitat quality. Early analyses exploring the relationships be­
tween krill recruitment and sea ice identified classic sea-ice variables, 
such as duration, time of arrival, and time of retreat, as important, and 
the remote connections resulting from these classic variables corrobo­
rate many of these early findings. The remote connections from our 
modern sea-ice variables improve upon this by using a more mechanistic 
description of the sea-ice habitat to identify more probable source re­
gions and more extensive and connected networks of transport path­
ways. These include source regions for South Georgia in the western and 
southern Weddell Sea as well as transport pathways along the South 
Scotia Ridge; source regions for the wAP in the Amundsen and Bel­
lingshausen seas; and source regions for the Bransfield region in the 
Bellingshausen and western Weddell seas. These results provide a step- 
change forward from exploring correlations between recruitment and 
environmental parameters to an understanding of the mechanisms that 
lead to these correlations. 
Our results have important implications in progressing current par­
adigms of how krill are responding to climate change. Our results sup­
port the emerging view that the impact of changing sea-ice dynamics on 
krill recruitment is nuanced (Melbourne-Thomas et al., 2016; Meyer 
et al., 2017; Saba et al., 2014). It is likely that krill respond to changes in 
sea ice quality, bounded by changes in sea-ice extent and timing. 
Furthermore, regional variation in dependencies on sea ice, e.g., evi­
denced by a lack of strong remote connections in the Bransfield region, 
may provide pockets of resilience to climate-driven changes in sea-ice 
dynamics. 
To robustly quantify the impacts of climate change on krill pop­
ulations, progression beyond correlations to statistical models with 
mechanistic underpinnings is needed (Murphy et al., 2018; Quetin et al., 
2007). Ideally, the most robust assessment method would be to develop 
a model that simulates the krill life cycle and population dynamics in 
response to environmental drivers, so that spatial estimates of krill 
biomass could be achieved. Currently, a lack of quantification in how 
changes in sea ice quality impact recruitment serves as a main barrier to 
simulating krill population dynamics. This has been hindered by un­
certainties in measuring krill recruitment, as well as limited spatio­
temporal coverage in measurements of sea ice physical-biological 
properties (Meiners et al., 2017). 
Our study begins to address this important knowledge gap. We 
identify a new suite of sea-ice variables that improve understanding of 
the relationship between sea ice and krill. These variables explicitly 
describe the physical habitat properties of sea ice, while considering its 
biological properties indirectly. Here our choice of sea-ice model is 
informed by our aims to compliment emerging satellite products, such as 
sea-ice thickness and rugosity (Tamura et al., 2015; Toyota et al., 2011), 
as well as snow thickness and under-ice currents. In the future, exploring 
the biological properties of sea ice explicitly will be vital to further 
quantifying these promising relationships. This could involve a model 
that represents sea ice biology, alongside mesoscale in-situ measure­
ments of sea-ice variables related to food availability (e.g. Castellani 
et al., 2020). Future analyses may also account for the effects of varying 
larval overwinter back-trajectories. Variations in transport would result 
in different life histories of exposure to sea ice habitats (Kohlbach et al., 
2017), therefore integrating our sea-ice indicators along back- 
trajectories will give further insight into the effects of varying life his­
tories on larval condition and recruitment. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Devi Veytia: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, 
Investigation, Methodology, Visualization, Writing - original draft, 
Writing - review & editing. 
Author contributions 
All authors contributed to conceptualization, methodology, formal 
analysis and writing. S.C., S.B., S.K., K.M. and E.M. contributed to the 
supervision of D.V. 
D. Veytia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Ecological Indicators 129 (2021) 107934
12
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors acknowledge the contributions of all the data providers 
of the krill density and length frequency data. D.V. is the recipient of a 
Tasmania Graduate Research Scholarship provided by the University of 
Tasmania. S.B. is the recipient of an Australian Research Council 
Australian Discovery Early Career Award [project DE180100828]. E.M. 
was supported by the BAS ALI-Science Ecosystems project (developing 
krill life-cycle models and future projections) and acknowledges BAS 
colleagues for discussions on the development of analyses, models and 
projections of Antarctic krill population processes. S. Wotherspoon 
provided very helpful guidance regarding the permutation analyses. 
This research was supported by the Australian Government [Antarctic 
Science Projects 4408 and 4512], and through the Antarctic Science 
Collaboration Initiative program as part of the Australian Antarctic 
Program Partnership. The study is also a contribution to the interna­
tional Integrating Climate and Ecosystems Dynamics Programme 
(ICED). K. K. was supported by JSPS KEKENHI [grants JP19K12301 and 
JP17H06323]. The surface velocity data were produced by SSALTO/ 
DUACS and distributed by Aviso+, with support from Cnes (http:// 
www.aviso.altimetry.fr/duacs/). The altimetry sea ice thickness data 
used in this study (doi 10.6096/CTOH_SEAICE_2019_12) were devel­
oped, validated by the CTOH/LEGOS, France and distributed by Aviso +
. 
Data statement 
KRILLBASE density data are freely available (https://www.bas.ac. 
uk/project/krillbase/). KRILLBASE length frequency data are available 
from the British Antarctic Survey by request (contact: Simeon Hill, 
sih@bas.ac.uk), and the Palmer LTER length frequency data are avail­
able 
online 
(https://doi.org/10.6073/pasta/be42bb841e696b7bca­
d9957aed33db5e). Ocean-sea ice model output are available from K.K. 
upon request (kazuya.kusahara@gmail.com). For sea-ice velocity fields 
from the Kimura dataset, contact N.K. (kimura_n@aori.u-tokyo.ac.jp). 
The remotely-sensed surface velocity and sea-ice thickness products are 
available on Aviso+ (http://www.aviso.altimetry.fr/). 
Appendix A. Supplementary data 
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2021.107934. 
References 
Arrigo, K.R., 2014. Sea ice ecosystems. Ann. Rev. Mar. Sci. 6, 439–467. 
Arrigo, K.R., Thomas, D.N., 2004. Large scale importance of sea ice biology in the 
Southern Ocean. Antarct. Sci. 16, 471. 
Arrigo, K.R., Worthen, D.L., Lizotte, M.P., Dixon, P., Dieckmann, G., 1997. Primary 
production in Antarctic sea ice. Science 276, 394–397. 
Atkinson, A., Hill, S.L., Pakhomov, E.A., Anadon, R., Chiba, S., Daly, K.L., Downie, R., 
Fretwell, P.T., Gerrish, L., Hosie, G.W., 2017. KRILLBASE: a circumpolar database of 
Antarctic krill and salp numerical densities, 1926-2016. 
Atkinson, A., Hill, S.L., Pakhomov, E.A., Siegel, V., Reiss, C.S., Loeb, V.J., Steinberg, D.K., 
Schmidt, K., Tarling, G.A., Gerrish, L., Sailley, S.F., 2019. Krill (Euphausia superba) 
distribution contracts southward during rapid regional warming. Nat. Clim. Change 
9, 142–147. 
Atkinson, A., Siegel, V., Pakhomov, E., Jessopp, M., Loeb, V., 2009. A re-appraisal of the 
total biomass and annual production of Antarctic krill. Deep Sea Res. Part I 56, 
727–740. 
Atkinson, A., Siegel, V., Pakhomov, E., Rothery, P., 2004. Long-term decline in krill stock 
and increase in salps within the Southern Ocean. Nature 432, 100–103. 
Bhattacharya, C., 1967. A simple method of resolution of a distribution into Gaussian 
components. Biometrics 115–135. 
Boyd, P.W., 2002. Environmental factors controlling phytoplankton processes in the 
Southern Ocean1. J. Phycol. 38, 844–861. 
Brierley, A.S., Fernandes, P.G., Brandon, M.A., Armstrong, F., Millard, N.W., McPhail, S. 
D., Stevenson, P., Pebody, M., Perrett, J., Squires, M., 2002. Antarctic krill under sea 
ice: elevated abundance in a narrow band just south of ice edge. Science 295, 
1890–1892. 
Capella, J.E., Quetin, L.B., Hofmann, E.E., Ross, R.M., 1992. Models of the early life 
history of Euphausia superba—Part II. Lagrangian calculations. Deep Sea Res. Part I 
Oceanogr. Res. Pap. 39, 1201–1220. 
Castellani, G., Schaafsma, F.L., Arndt, S., Lange, B.A., Peeken, I., Ehrlich, J., David, C., 
Ricker, R., Krumpen, T., Hendricks, S., 2020. Large-scale variability of physical and 
biological sea-ice properties in polar oceans. Front. Mar. Sci. 7, 536. 
Cavalieri, D.J., Parkinson, C.L., Gloersen, P., Zwally, H.J., 1996, updated yearly. Sea Ice 
Concentrations from Nimbus-7 SMMR and DMSP SSM/I-SSMIS Passive Microwave 
Data, Version 1. NASA National Snow and Ice Data Center Distributed Active 
Archive Center, Boulder, Colorado USA. 
Cavan, E.L., Belcher, A., Atkinson, A., Hill, S.L., Kawaguchi, S., McCormack, S., 
Meyer, B., Nicol, S., Ratnarajah, L., Schmidt, K., Steinberg, D.K., Tarling, G.A., 
Boyd, P.W., 2019. The importance of Antarctic krill in biogeochemical cycles. Nat. 
Commun. 10, 4742. 
Cavanagh, R.D., Murphy, E.J., Bracegirdle, T.J., Turner, J., Knowland, C.A., Corney, S.P., 
Smith Jr, W.O., Waluda, C.M., Johnston, N.M., Bellerby, R.G., 2017. A synergistic 
approach for evaluating climate model output for ecological applications. Front. 
Mar. Sci. 4, 308. 
Cox, M.J., Candy, S., de la Mare, W.K., Nicol, S., Kawaguchi, S., Gales, N., 2018. No 
evidence for a decline in the density of Antarctic krill Euphausia superba Dana, 
1850, in the Southwest Atlantic sector between 1976 and 2016. J. Crust. Biol. 38, 
656–661. 
Croxall, J.P., Reid, K., Prince, P.A., 1999. Diet, provisioning and productivity responses 
of marine predators to differences in availability of Antarctic krill. Mar. Ecol. Prog. 
Ser. 177, 115–131. 
Daly, K.L., 1990. Overwintering development, growth, and feeding of larval Euphausia 
superba in the Antarctic marginal ice zone. Limnol. Oceanogr. 35, 1564–1576. 
Daly, K.L., 2004. Overwintering growth and development of larval Euphausia superba: 
an interannual comparison under varying environmental conditions west of the 
Antarctic Peninsula. Deep Sea Res. Part II 51, 2139–2168. 
David, C., Lange, B., Krumpen, T., Schaafsma, F., van Franeker, J.A., Flores, H., 2016. 
Under-ice distribution of polar cod Boreogadus saida in the central Arctic Ocean and 
their association with sea-ice habitat properties. Polar Biol. 39, 981–994. 
De la Mare, W., 1994. Estimating krill recruitment and its variability. CCAMLR Sci. 1, 
55–69. 
Dee, D.P., Uppala, S.M., Simmons, A., Berrisford, P., Poli, P., Kobayashi, S., Andrae, U., 
Balmaseda, M., Balsamo, G., Bauer, D.P., 2011. The ERA-Interim reanalysis: 
Configuration and performance of the data assimilation system. Q. J. R. Meteorolog. 
Soc. 137, 553–597. 
Fach, B.A., Hofmann, E.E., Murphy, E.J., 2002. Modeling studies of Antarctic krill 
Euphausia superba survival during transport across the Scotia Sea. Mar. Ecol. Prog. 
Ser. 231, 187–203. 
Fach, B.A., Klinck, J.M., 2006. Transport of Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba) across the 
Scotia Sea. Part I: circulation and particle tracking simulations. Deep Sea Res. Part I 
53, 987–1010. 
Flores, H., Van Franeker, J.A., Siegel, V., Haraldsson, M., Strass, V., Meesters, E.H., 
Bathmann, U., Wolff, W.J., 2012. The association of Antarctic krill Euphausia 
superba with the under-ice habitat. PLoS ONE 7, e31775. 
Guerreiro, K., Fleury, S., Zakharova, E., Kouraev, A., R´emy, F., Maisongrande, P., 2017. 
Comparison of CryoSat-2 and ENVISAT radar freeboard over Arctic sea ice: toward 
an improved Envisat freeboard retrieval. The Cryosphere 11, 2059–2073. 
Haas, C., 2004. Late-summer sea ice thickness variability in the Arctic Transpolar Drift 
1991–2001 derived from ground-based electromagnetic sounding. Geophys. Res, 
Lett, p. 31. 
Hamner, W., Hamner, P., Obst, B., Carleton, J., 1989. Field observations on the ontogeny 
of schooling of Euphausia superba furciliae and its relationship to ice in Antarctic 
waters. Limnol. Oceanogr. 34, 451–456. 
Hasumi, H., 2006. CCSR Ocean Component Model (COCO) version 4.0. CCSR Report 25. 
University of Tokyo. 
Hofmann, E.E., Hüsrevo˘glu, Y.S., 2003. A circumpolar modeling study of habitat control 
of Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba) reproductive success. Deep Sea Res. Part II 50, 
3121–3142. 
Hofmann, E.E., Klinck, J.M., Locarnini, R.A., Fach, B., Murphy, E., 1998. Krill transport 
in the Scotia Sea and environs. Antarct. Sci. 10, 406–415. 
Ichii, T., Naganobu, M., 1996. Surface water circulation in krill fishing areas near the 
South Shetland Islands. CCAMLR Sci. 3, 125–136. 
Jeffery, N., Maltrud, M.E., Hunke, E.C., Wang, S., Wolfe, J., Turner, A.K., Burrows, S.M., 
Shi, X., Lipscomb, W.H., Maslowski, W., 2020. Investigating controls on sea ice algal 
production using E3SMv1. 1-BGC. Annals of Glaciology, 1-22. 
Jia, Z., Swadling, K.M., Meiners, K.M., Kawaguchi, S., Virtue, P., 2016. The zooplankton 
food web under East Antarctic pack ice – A stable isotope study. Deep Sea Res. Part II 
131, 189–202. 
Ju, S.-J., Harvey, H.R., 2004. Lipids as markers of nutritional condition and diet in the 
Antarctic krill Euphausia superba and Euphausia crystallorophias during austral 
winter. Deep Sea Res. Part II 51, 2199–2214. 
Kacimi, S., Kwok, R., 2020. The Antarctic sea ice cover from ICESat-2 and CryoSat-2: 
freeboard, snow depth, and ice thickness. The Cryosphere 14, 4453–4474. 
Kawaguchi, S., Satake, M., 1994. Relationship between recruitment of the Antarctic krill 
and the degree of ice cover near the South Shetland Islands. Fish. Sci. 60, 123–124. 
D. Veytia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Ecological Indicators 129 (2021) 107934
13
Kimura, N., Nishimura, A., Tanaka, Y., Yamaguchi, H., 2013. Influence of winter sea-ice 
motion on summer ice cover in the Arctic. Polar Res. 32, 20193. 
Kimura, N., Wakatsuchi, M., 2011. Large-scale processes governing the seasonal 
variability of the Antarctic sea ice. Tellus A: Dynamic Meteorology and 
Oceanography 63, 828–840. 
Kohlbach, D., Lange, B.A., Schaafsma, F.L., David, C., Vortkamp, M., Graeve, M., van 
Franeker, J.A., Krumpen, T., Flores, H., 2017. Ice Algae-Produced Carbon Is Critical 
for Overwintering of Antarctic Krill Euphausia superba. Frontiers in Marine Science 
4. 
Kusahara, K., Hasumi, H., 2013. Modeling Antarctic ice shelf responses to future climate 
changes and impacts on the ocean. J. Geophys. Res. Oceans 118, 2454–2475. 
Kusahara, K., Reid, P., Williams, G.D., Massom, R., Hasumi, H., 2018. An ocean-sea ice 
model study of the unprecedented Antarctic sea ice minimum in 2016. Environ. Res. 
Lett. 13, 084020. 
Kusahara, K., Williams, G.D., Massom, R., Reid, P., Hasumi, H., 2017. Roles of wind 
stress and thermodynamic forcing in recent trends in Antarctic sea ice and Southern 
Ocean SST: An ocean-sea ice model study. Global Planet. Change 158, 103–118. 
Kusahara, K., Williams, G.D., Massom, R., Reid, P., Hasumi, H., 2019. Spatiotemporal 
dependence of Antarctic sea ice variability to dynamic and thermodynamic forcing: 
A coupled ocean–sea ice model study. Clim. Dyn. 52, 3791–3807. 
Loeb, V.J., Santora, J.A., 2015. Climate variability and spatiotemporal dynamics of five 
Southern Ocean krill species. Prog. Oceanogr. 134, 93–122. 
Macdonald, P., Pitcher, T., 1979. Age-groups from size-frequency data: a versatile and 
efficient method of analyzing distribution mixtures. Can. J. Fish Aquat. Sci. 36, 
987–1001. 
Mackintosh, N.A., 1972. Life cycle of Antarctic krill in relation to ice and water 
conditions. Discovery Rep. 36, 1–94. 
Maksym, T., 2019. Arctic and Antarctic sea ice change: contrasts, commonalities, and 
causes. Ann. Rev. Mar. Sci. 11, 187–213. 
Marr, J.W.S., 1962. The natural history and geography of the Antarctic krill (Euphausia 
superba Dana). Discovery Rep. 32, 33–464. 
Massom, R.A., Stammerjohn, S.E., 2010. Antarctic sea ice change and 
variability–physical and ecological implications. Polar Sci. 4, 149–186. 
Massom, R.A., Stammerjohn, S.E., Lefebvre, W., Harangozo, S.A., Adams, N., Scambos, T. 
A., Pook, M.J., Fowler, C., 2008. West Antarctic Peninsula sea ice in 2005: Extreme 
ice compaction and ice edge retreat due to strong anomaly with respect to climate. 
J. Geophys. Res. Oceans 113. 
Massom, R.A., Stammerjohn, S.E., Smith, R.C., Pook, M.J., Iannuzzi, R.A., Adams, N., 
Martinson, D.G., Vernet, M., Fraser, W.R., Quetin, L.B., 2006. Extreme anomalous 
atmospheric circulation in the West Antarctic Peninsula region in austral spring and 
summer 2001/02, and its profound impact on sea ice and biota. J. Clim. 19, 
3544–3571. 
Meiners, K.M., Arndt, S., Bestley, S., Krumpen, T., Ricker, R., Milnes, M., Newbery, K., 
Freier, U., Jarman, S., King, R., Proud, R., Kawaguchi, S., Meyer, B., 2017. Antarctic 
pack ice algal distribution: Floe-scale spatial variability and predictability from 
physical parameters. Geophys. Res. Lett. 44, 7382–7390. 
Meiners, K.M., Vancoppenolle, M., Thanassekos, S., Dieckmann, G.S., Thomas, D.N., 
Tison, J.L., Arrigo, K.R., Garrison, D.L., McMinn, A., Lannuzel, D., van der Merwe, P., 
Swadling, K.M., Smith, W.O., Melnikov, I., Raymond, B., 2012. Chlorophyll a in 
Antarctic sea ice from historical ice core data. Geophys. Res. Lett. 39, n/a-n/a. 
Melbourne-Thomas, J., Corney, S., Trebilco, R., Meiners, K., Stevens, R., Kawaguchi, S., 
Sumner, M., Constable, A., 2016. Under ice habitats for Antarctic krill larvae: Could 
less mean more under climate warming? Geophys. Res. Lett. 43. 
Meredith, M., Sommerkorn, M., Cassotta, S., Derksen, C., Ekaykin, A., Hollowed, A., 
Kofinas, G., Mackintosh, A., Melbourne-Thomas, J., Muelbert, M.M.C., Ottersen, G., 
Pritchard, H., Schuur, E.A.G., 2019. Polar Regions. In: IPCC Special Report on the 
Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate [H.-O. P¨ortner, D.C. Roberts, V. 
Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, M. Tignor, E. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. 
Nicolai, A. Okem, J. Petzold, B. Rama, N.M. Weyer (eds.)]. 
Meyer, B., 2012. The overwintering of Antarctic krill, Euphausia superba, from an 
ecophysiological perspective. Polar Biol. 35, 15–37. 
Meyer, B., Atkinson, A., St¨obing, D., Oettl, B., Hagen, W., Bathmann, U., 2002. Feeding 
and energy budgets of Antarctic krill Euphausia superba at the onset of winter—I. 
Furcilia III larvae. Limnol. Oceanogr. 47, 943–952. 
Meyer, B., Freier, U., Grimm, V., Groeneveld, J., Hunt, B.P., Kerwath, S., King, R., 
Klaas, C., Pakhomov, E., Meiners, K.M., 2017. The winter pack-ice zone provides a 
sheltered but food-poor habitat for larval Antarctic krill. Nat. Ecol. Evol. 1, 
1853–1861. 
Meyer, B., Fuentes, V., Guerra, C., Schmidt, K., Atkinson, A., Spahic, S., Cisewski, B., 
Freier, U., Olariaga, A., Bathmanna, U., 2009. Physiology, growth, and development 
of larval krill Euphausia superba in autumn and winter in the Lazarev Sea, 
Antarctica. Limnol. Oceanogr. 54, 1595–1614. 
Mo, K.C., Higgins, R.W., 1998. The Pacific-South American modes and tropical 
convection during the Southern Hemisphere winter. Mon. Weather Rev. 126, 
1581–1596. 
Murphy, E., Johnston, N., Corney, S., Reid, K., 2018. Integrating Climate and Ecosystem 
Dynamics in the Southern Ocean (ICED) programme: Report of the ICED-CCAMLR 
Projections Workshop, 5–7 Apr 2018. SC-CAMLR-XXXVII, Hobart, Aus.  
Murphy, E., Thorpe, S., Watkins, J., Hewitt, R., 2004. Modeling the krill transport 
pathways in the Scotia Sea: spatial and environmental connections generating the 
seasonal distribution of krill. Deep Sea Res. Part II 51, 1435–1456. 
Murphy, E., Watkins, J., Trathan, P., Reid, K., Meredith, M., Thorpe, S., Johnston, N., 
Clarke, A., Tarling, G., Collins, M., 2007a. Spatial and temporal operation of the 
Scotia Sea ecosystem: a review of large-scale links in a krill centred food web. Philos. 
Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 362, 113–148. 
Murphy, E.J., Cavanagh, R.D., Drinkwater, K.F., Grant, S.M., Heymans, J., Hofmann, E. 
E., Hunt, G.L., Johnston, N.M., 2016. Understanding the structure and functioning of 
polar pelagic ecosystems to predict the impacts of change. Proc. R. Soc. B 283, 
20161646. 
Murphy, E.J., Clarke, A., Abram, N.J., Turner, J., 2014. Variability of sea-ice in the 
northern Weddell Sea during the 20th century. J. Geophys. Res. Oceans 119, 
4549–4572. 
Murphy, E.J., Trathan, P.N., Watkins, J.L., Reid, K., Meredith, M.P., Forcada, J., 
Thorpe, S.E., Johnston, N.M., Rothery, P., 2007b. Climatically driven fluctuations in 
Southern Ocean ecosystems. Proceedings of the Royal Soc. B: Biol. Sci. 274, 
3057–3067. 
Murphy, E.J., Watkins, J., Reid, K., Trathan, P., Everson, I., Croxall, J., Priddle, J., 
Brandon, M., Brierley, A., Hofmann, E., 1998. Interannual variability of the South 
Georgia marine ecosystem: biological and physical sources of variation in the 
abundance of krill. Fish. Oceanogr. 7, 381–390. 
Nicol, S., 2006. Krill, currents, and sea ice: Euphausia superba and its changing 
environment. AIBS Bulletin 56, 111–120. 
Nicol, S., Foster, J., 2016. The fishery for Antarctic krill: Its current status and 
management regime, Biology and Ecology of Antarctic krill. Springer 387–421. 
Nicol, S., Pauly, T., Bindoff, N.L., Wright, S., Thiele, D., Hosie, G.W., Strutton, P.G., 
Woehler, E., 2000. Ocean circulation off east Antarctica affects ecosystem structure 
and sea-ice extent. Nature 406, 504–507. 
Palmer Station Antarctica LTER, Steinberg, D., 2020. Standard body length of Euphausia 
superba collected with a 2-m, 700-um net towed from surface to 120 m, collected 
aboard Palmer LTER annual cruises off the coast of the Western Antarctic Peninsula, 
2009 - 2019, in: Initiative, E.D. (Ed.), 5 ed. Environmental Data Initiative. 
Perry, F.A., Atkinson, A., Sailley, S.F., Tarling, G.A., Hill, S.L., Lucas, C.H., Mayor, D.J., 
2019. Habitat partitioning in Antarctic krill: Spawning hotspots and nursery areas. 
PLoS ONE 14, e0219325. 
Pi˜nones, A., Fedorov, A.V., 2016. Projected changes of Antarctic krill habitat by the end 
of the 21st century. Geophys. Res. Lett. 43, 8580–8589. 
Pi˜nones, A., Hofmann, E.E., Daly, K.L., Dinniman, M.S., Klinck, J.M., 2013. Modeling the 
remote and local connectivity of Antarctic krill populations along the western 
Antarctic Peninsula. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 481, 69–92. 
Quetin, L.B., Ross, R.M., 2003. Episodic recruitment in Antarctic krill Euphausia superba 
in the Palmer LTER study region. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 259, 185–200. 
Quetin, L.B., Ross, R.M., Fritsen, C.H., Vernet, M., 2007. Ecological responses of 
Antarctic krill to environmental variability: can we predict the future? Antarct. Sci. 
19, 253–266. 
R Core Team, 2018. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R 
Foundation for Statistical computing, Vienna, Austria.  
Raphael, M.N., 2007. The influence of atmospheric zonal wave three on Antarctic sea ice 
variability. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres 112. 
Raphael, M.N., Marshall, G., Turner, J., Fogt, R., Schneider, D., Dixon, D., Hosking, J., 
Jones, J., Hobbs, W.R., 2016. The Amundsen Sea low: Variability, change, and 
impact on Antarctic climate. Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc. 97, 111–121. 
Saba, G.K., Fraser, W.R., Saba, V.S., Iannuzzi, R.A., Coleman, K.E., Doney, S.C., 
Ducklow, H.W., Martinson, D.G., Miles, T.N., Patterson-Fraser, D.L., 2014. Winter 
and spring controls on the summer food web of the coastal West Antarctic Peninsula. 
Nat. Commun. 5, 4318. 
Schaafsma, F., David, C., Pakhomov, E., Hunt, B.P., Lange, B., Flores, H., van Franeker, J. 
A., 2016. Size and stage composition of age class 0 Antarctic krill (Euphausia 
superba) in the ice–water interface layer during winter/early spring. Polar Biol. 39, 
1515–1526. 
Schmidt, K., Atkinson, A., Pond, D.W., Ireland, L.C., 2014. Feeding and overwintering of 
Antarctic krill across its major habitats: The role of sea ice cover, water depth, and 
phytoplankton abundance. Limnol. Oceanogr. 59, 17–36. 
Schmidt, K., Atkinson, A., Steigenberger, S., Fielding, S., Lindsay, M.C., Pond, D.W., 
Tarling, G.A., Klevjer, T.A., Allen, C.S., Nicol, S., 2011. Seabed foraging by Antarctic 
krill: Implications for stock assessment, bentho-pelagic coupling, and the vertical 
transfer of iron. Limnol. Oceanogr. 56, 1411–1428. 
Siegel, V., 2000. Krill (Euphausiacea) life history and aspects of population dynamics. 
Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 57, 130–150. 
Siegel, V., Loeb, V., 1995. Recruitment of Antarctic krill Euphausia superba and possible 
causes for its variability. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 123, 45–56. 
Siegel, V., Watkins, J.L., 2016. Distribution, Biomass and Demography of Antarctic Krill, 
Euphausia superba. In: Siegel, V. (Ed.), Biology and Ecology of Antarctic Krill. 
Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 21–100. 
Stammerjohn, S., Martinson, D., Smith, R., Yuan, X., Rind, D., 2008. Trends in Antarctic 
annual sea ice retreat and advance and their relation to El Ni˜no-Southern Oscillation 
and Southern Annular Mode variability. J. Geophys. Res. Oceans 113. 
Sumata, H., Lavergne, T., Girard-Ardhuin, F., Kimura, N., Tschudi, M.A., Kauker, F., 
Karcher, M., Gerdes, R., 2014. An intercomparison of A rctic ice drift products to 
deduce uncertainty estimates. J. Geophys. Res. Oceans 119, 4887–4921. 
Szanyi, S., Lukovich, J.V., Barber, D., Haller, G., 2016. Persistent artifacts in the NSIDC 
ice motion data set and their implications for analysis. Geophys. Res. Lett. 43, 
10,800-810,807. 
Tamura, T., Ohshima, K.I., Lieser, J.L., Toyota, T., Tateyama, K., Nomura, D., Nakata, K., 
Fraser, A.D., Jansen, P.W., Newbery, K.B., 2015. Helicopter-borne observations with 
portable microwave radiometer in the Southern Ocean and the Sea of Okhotsk. Ann. 
Glaciol. 56, 436–444. 
Thorpe, S., Murphy, E., Watkins, J., 2007. Circumpolar connections between Antarctic 
krill (Euphausia superba Dana) populations: investigating the roles of ocean and sea 
ice transport. Deep Sea Res. Part I 54, 792–810. 
D. Veytia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Ecological Indicators 129 (2021) 107934
14
Thorpe, S.E., Heywood, K.J., Stevens, D.P., Brandon, M.A., 2004. Tracking passive 
drifters in a high resolution ocean model: implications for interannual variability of 
larval krill transport to South Georgia. Deep Sea Res. Part I 51, 909–920. 
Thorpe, S.E., Tarling, G.A., Murphy, E.J., 2019. Circumpolar patterns in Antarctic krill 
larval recruitment: an environmentally driven model. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 613, 
77–96. 
Tison, J.-L., Maksym, T., Fraser, A.D., Corkill, M., Kimura, N., Nosaka, Y., Nomura, D., 
Vancoppenolle, M., Ackley, S., Stammerjohn, S., 2020. Physical and biological 
properties of early winter Antarctic sea ice in the Ross Sea. Ann. Glaciol. 1–19. 
Toyota, T., Ono, S., Cho, K., Ohshima, K.I., 2011. Retrieval of sea-ice thickness 
distribution in the Sea of Okhotsk from ALOS/PALSAR backscatter data. Ann. 
Glaciol. 52, 177–184. 
Trathan, P.N., Hill, S.L., 2016. The importance of krill predation in the Southern Ocean, 
Biology and ecology of Antarctic krill. Springer 321–350. 
Tschudi, M., Meier, W.N., Stewart, J.S., Fowler, C., Maslanik, J., 2019. Polar Pathfinder 
Weekly 25 km EASE-Grid Sea Ice Motion Vectors, Version 4, in: Center, N.N.S.a.I.D. 
C.D.A.A. (Ed.). NASA National Snow and Ice Data Center Distributed Active Archive 
Center, Boulder, Colorado, USA. 
Turner, J., 2004. The el nino–southern oscillation and antarctica. Int. J. Climatol.: A J. 
Royal Meteorol. Soc. 24, 1–31. 
Veytia, D., Corney, S., Meiners, K.M., Kawaguchi, S., Murphy, E.J., Bestley, S., 2020. 
Circumpolar projections of Antarctic krill growth potential. Nat. Clim. Change 10, 
568–575. 
Walsh, J., Reiss, C.S., Watters, G.M., 2020. Flexibility in Antarctic krill Euphausia 
superba decouples diet and recruitment from overwinter sea-ice conditions in the 
northern Antarctic Peninsula. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 642, 1–19. 
Wiedenmann, J., Cresswell, K.A., Mangel, M., 2009. Connecting recruitment of Antarctic 
krill and sea ice. Limnol. Oceanogr. 54, 799–811. 
Wongpan, P., Meiners, K.M., Langhorne, P.J., Heil, P., Smith, I.J., Leonard, G.H., 
Massom, R.A., Clementson, L.A., Haskell, T.G., 2018. Estimation of Antarctic Land- 
Fast Sea Ice Algal Biomass and Snow Thickness From Under-Ice Radiance Spectra in 
Two Contrasting Areas. J. Geophys. Res. Oceans 123, 1907–1923. 
Worby, A.P., Geiger, C.A., Paget, M.J., Van Woert, M.L., Ackley, S.F., DeLiberty, T.L., 
2008. Thickness distribution of Antarctic sea ice. J. Geophys. Res. Oceans 113. 
Yoshida, T., Kawaguchi, S., Meyer, B., Virtue, P., Penschow, J., Nash, G., 2009. Structural 
changes in the digestive glands of larval Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba) during 
starvation. Polar Biol. 32, 503–507. 
Yuan, X., Li, C., 2008. Climate modes in southern high latitudes and their impacts on 
Antarctic sea ice. J. Geophys. Res. Oceans 113. 
D. Veytia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
