RESEARCH
Open Access
Successful treatment of severe sepsis and
diarrhea after vagotomy utilizing fecal microbiota
transplantation: a case report
Qiurong Li*, Chenyang Wang, Chun Tang, Qin He, Xiaofan Zhao, Ning Li and Jieshou Li*
Abstract
Introduction: Dysbiosis of intestinal microbiota likely plays an important role in the development of gut-derived
infections, making it a potential therapeutic target against sepsis. However, experience with fecal microbiota
transplantation (FMT) in the treatment of sepsis and knowledge of the underlying mechanisms are extremely
lacking. In this article, we describe a case of a patient who developed sepsis after a vagotomy and later received an
infusion of donor feces microbiota, and we report our findings.
Methods: A 44-year-old woman developed septic shock and severe watery diarrhea 4 days after undergoing a
vagotomy. Antibiotics, probiotics and supportive treatment strategies were used for about 30 day after surgery,
but the patient’s fever, bacteremia and watery diarrhea persisted. Considering the possibility of intestinal dysbiosis,
we evaluated the structure and composition of the patient’s fecal microbiota using 16S rDNA-based molecular
techniques. As expected, the gut microbiota was extensively disrupted; therefore, a donor fecal suspension was
delivered into the patient by nasoduodenal tube. The patient’s clinical outcomes and shifts of the gut microbiota
following the treatment were also determined.
Results: Dramatically, the patient’s septic symptoms and severe diarrhea were successfully controlled following
FMT. Her stool output markedly declined after 7 days and normalized 16 days after FMT. A significant modification
in her microbiota composition was consistently seen, characterized by a profound enrichment of the commensals
in Firmicutes and depletion of opportunistic organisms in Proteobacteria. Furthermore, we identified a reconstituted
bacterial community enriched in Firmicutes and depleted of Proteobacteria members that was associated with fecal
output, plasma markers of inflammation and T helper cells.
Conclusions: In this report, we describe our initial experience with FMT, in which we successfully used it in the
treatment of a patient with sepsis and severe diarrhea after a vagotomy. Our data indicate an association between
repaired intestinal microbiota barrier and improvement of clinical outcomes. Our patient’s surprising clinical benefits
from FMT demonstrate the role of intestinal microbiota in modulating immune equilibrium. It represents a
breakthrough in the clinical management of sepsis and suggests new therapeutic avenues to pursue for
microbiota-related indications.
* Correspondence: liqiurongjue@126.com; lijieshounju@163.com
Research Institute of General Surgery, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing University
School of Medicine, No.305 East Zhongshan Road, Nanjing 210002, China
© 2015 Li et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.
Li et al. Critical Care  (2015) 19:37 
DOI 10.1186/s13054-015-0738-7
Introduction
The mucosal surface of the gastrointestinal tract is colo-
nized by a complex ecosystem of commensal microbiota
that mediates homeostatic effects on the host and shapes
aspects of host metabolism, immune functions and pro-
tection against invasion by pathogens [1-3]. It is now
well appreciated that the intestinal microbiota consti-
tutes an efficient microbial barrier against infections and
is critical to the host antimicrobial defense. Protracted
loss of the typical microbiota composition has been as-
sociated with exposure to antibiotics, inflammation and
several disorders, including inflammatory bowel disease
[4,5]. Recurrent Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is
thought to result from persistent disruption of commensal
gut microbiota [6]. The reestablishment of intestinal
microbiota balance is needed in a curative approach for
therapy. Recently, fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT)
has emerged as a critical treatment for recurrent CDI
[7,8]. However, whether an ecologically stable microbial
population is restored and the nature of the transition re-
main to be elucidated.
Sepsis is one of the leading causes of mortality in the in-
tensive care unit (ICU), with rates of approximately 50%
to 60% in patients who develop septic shock and 30% to
50% in those who develop severe sepsis [9,10]. Therapy for
severe sepsis is still largely supportive and based on symp-
toms. The commensal enteric microbiota constitutes a
pivotal microbial barrier that protects against opportunis-
tic pathogen invasion [1-3]. The gut microbiota is essential
for the maintenance of mucosal immune homeostasis [2].
Impairment of the microbial barrier may allow enteric
bacteria to cause sepsis [11]. Intestinal microbiota dysbio-
sis is often seen in patients with sepsis, suggesting its pos-
sible contribution in the initiation and/or perpetuation of
the disease [12,13]. Regulation of gut microbiota is a deli-
cate balancing act. Given the intestinal dysbiosis and its
prominent role in the development of sepsis, improved
clinical outcomes may be achieved with FMT in patients
with sepsis. However, experience with this procedure in
sepsis remains limited. The efficacy of FMT in recurrent
CDI encouraged us to investigate the therapeutic value of
the strategy in patients with sepsis and the underlying
mechanisms. In this article, we describe a case of a patient
who developed septic shock and severe diarrhea following
vagotomy and report our findings regarding FMT. We
also sought to investigate the changes in the identity and
abundance of the bacteria in gut microbial communities
and to assess relationships between these assemblages and
immunologic signatures of the sepsis patient.
Material and methods
Ethical approval
The procedure we performed was approved by the Admin-
istrative Panel for Medical Research on Human Subjects of
Jinling Hospital (the ethics committee of our hospital). The
patient gave us her written informed consent to undergo
the procedure and to have her case published.
Case presentation
Our patient was a 44-year-old woman who underwent
proximal gastrectomy and bilateral truncal vagotomy for
a gastric neuroendocrine tumor. Her immediate postop-
erative course was uneventful, and no surgical complica-
tions, such as anastomotic fistula, were observed. On the
third postoperative day, she presented with abdominal
discomfort and bloating, nausea and vomiting (Figure 1).
On the fourth postoperative day, the patient developed
severe, watery diarrhea. Her blood pressure suddenly de-
creased to 60/38 mmHg for unknown reason. An exam-
ination revealed that her body temperature was 37.2°C,
her pulse was increased at 126 beats/minute, her respira-
tory rate was 28 breaths/minute and her blood oxygen
saturation was 86%. A complete blood count was ob-
tained, and the results revealed a white blood cell count
of 2.9 × 109/L with 83% neutrophils and 13% lympho-
cytes. Analysis of blood gas showed that the patient’s
blood lactate level was 8.2 mmol/L and base excess
was −9.2. Serum level of C-reactive protein (CRP) was
143.4 mg/L. Blood and urine were collected for bacterial
culture, and both test results were negative. The patient
was urgently transferred to the ICU. On the fifth postop-
erative day, her temperature rose to 39.6°C and her pulse
rate was 145 beats/minute, and she developed respira-
tory distress (Additional file 1). Endotracheal intubation
was performed to allow mechanical ventilation (Figure 1).
Her degree of diarrhea was aggravated, with a passage of
greenish, watery liquid exceeding 1,800 ml. Her white
blood cell count had increased to 7.9 × 109/L, and the
proportion of neutrophils had risen to 98%. Her platelet
count had decreased, and a coagulation test showed a
prolonged time to coagulation. Sulbactam, ornidazole,
vecuronium, norepinephrine, hydrocortisone and inten-
sive intravenous fluids were administered, owing to
concern about septic shock [14]. The patient was then
treated with venovenous extracorporeal membrane oxy-
genation (VV-ECMO) via percutaneous access and con-
tinuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT). During the
following days, the patient’s vital signs and clinical con-
dition gradually stabilized. VV-ECMO and CRRT were
stopped on the 12th postoperative day, but the patient’s
diarrhea did not shown any improvement. On the next
day, her fever reoccurred, with a peak temperature of
38.7°C (Additional file 1). Her white blood cell count
rose further to 18.0 × 109/L with 89% neutrophils and
10% lymphocytes. Her blood cultures now yielded Acine-
tobacter baumannii and Enterococcus faecalis, revealing
a polymicrobial sepsis. Multiple antibiotics, including
imipenem, caspofungin, penicillin and/or linezolid, and
Li et al. Critical Care  (2015) 19:37 
Page 2 of 12
even probiotic bifidobacteria, were administered. Ab-
dominal computed tomography (CT) was performed on
days 15 and 22 postsurgery, and no intraabdominal free
fluid or abscesses was noted (Additional file 2 and
Additional file 3). The therapeutic strategies with antibi-
otics and probiotic were continued until 28 days, when
the patient still had a fever (38.3°C) and the volume of
watery stools reached 2,855 ml. On that day, the pa-
tient’s blood culture grew Propionibacterium acnes. Her
white blood cell count returned to normal, but her CRP
level remained as high as 103.3 mg/L. The timeline
shown in Figure 1 depicts the temporal course of our
patient’s treatment.
Analysis of fecal microbiota
Considering the possibility of intestinal dysbiosis, we ap-
plied 16S rRNA gene-based molecular techniques to
characterize the fecal bacterial composition in our patient
according to a procedure described previously [15]. The
partial fragments of the 16S rRNA gene were amplified
using universal primers targeting the hypervariable V3 re-
gion and were separated by denaturing gradient gel elec-
trophoresis (DGGE) [15]. The predominant bands were
sequenced to gain the closest bacterial relatives using the
Basic Local Alignment Search Tool, and they were phylo-
genetically analyzed with MEGA 4.0 software [16,17].
Fecal microbiota transplantation
On the basis of the molecular analysis, the patient’s
microbiota was extensively perturbed (Figure 2), raising
an interesting possibility of using FMT in the manage-
ment of her disorder. Therefore, the infusion of donor
feces was performed in the patient. The patient’s brother
(40 years old) was selected as the donor of fecal micro-
biota. He was screened to exclude the risks for blood-
borne communicable diseases. His fecal samples were
validated as negative for common stool pathogens. The
feces (70 g) freshly collected on the day of infusion were
diluted with sterile saline (350 ml). The homogenized
solution was filtered twice through a presterilized metal
sieve. The filtrates (120 ml) were infused into the patient
via a nasogastric tube on the 30th day after her surgery.
The patient’s stool was daily collected, and an aliquot
(220 mg) of each sample was immediately stored at
−70°C until DNA extraction. Her fecal microbiota was
assessed using the protocol stated above.
Flow cytometric analysis
Blood specimens were collected from the patient and
from healthy subjects. After activation with phorbol
myristate acetate and ionomycin, immunostaining was
performed using fluorescein-labeled monoclonal anti-
bodies against CD4, interferon γ (INF-γ), interleukin
(IL)-4 and IL-17 (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA)
[18]. Cells were run on a BD FACSCalibur flow cyt-
ometer, and the data were analyzed with CellQuest soft-
ware (BD Biosciences). A logical gate combining CD4+
cells and their scatter properties was used for the pheno-
types of T helper type 2 (Th2) and Th17 cells.
Assay of serum cytokines
Serum concentrations of tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-
α), IL-1β, IL-6, IL-10, IL-18, IFN-γ and high-mobility
group box 1 (HMGB1) protein were measured using
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kits (R&D Systems,
Abingdon, UK).
Statistical analysis
The relative intensity of each band was expressed as a
proportion (%) of the sum of all fragments in the same
lane of the gel [15]. Principal component analysis (PCA)
was conducted with CANOCO software for Windows
4.5 (Microcomputer Power, Ithaca, NY, USA). Correl-
ation between two variances was estimated using linear
regression analysis with a Pearson test. A P-value <0.05
was considered significant.
Figure 1 Treatment timeline of the patient. The timeline shows the major clinical events during the course of the patient’s treatment. CRRT,
Continuous renal replacement therapy; VV-ECMO, Venovenous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; FMT, Fecal microbiota transplantation.
Li et al. Critical Care  (2015) 19:37 
Page 3 of 12
Results
Intestinal microbiota dysbiosis
As shown in the molecular fingerprinting (Figure 2A,B),
the patient’s microbiota was extensively disturbed, with
a very low similarity compared to that of the healthy
subject. PCA provided clearer evidence for this dysbiosis
(Figure 2C). The observations were further confirmed by
compositional analysis of the predominant bacterial taxa.
The most striking changes in the microbiota were the
depletion in the phyla Firmicutes (16% vs. 52%) and Bac-
teroidetes (0% vs. 29%) and a dramatic expansion in
the phylum Proteobacteria (78% vs. 16%) in comparison
to those of the healthy control (Figure 3). The reduction
in Firmicutes was due mainly to significant depletion
of the families Eubacteriaceae and Clostridiaceae in
particular, as well as of the families Ruminococcaceae and
Lachnospiraceae (Figure 4). The phylum Bacteroidetes was
not detected in the patient’s microbiota, which was attrib-
utable mainly to absence of the family Bacteroidaceae.
Altered Proteobacteria was featured by expansion of
the Enterobacteriaceae family members with proinflamma-
tory potential, including Enterobacter cloacae (band 29),
Yersinia enterocolitica (band 26), Raoultella ornithinolytica
(band 23), Klebsiella pneumoniae (band 19), Enterobacter
sp. (band 31) and Acinetobacter baumannii (band 8)
(Figure 5, Additional file 4 and Additional file 5).
Improvement of clinical outcomes
On the basis of the findings described above, we applied
FMT for the treatment of sepsis and severe diarrhea in
Figure 2 Molecular assessments of the fecal bacterial microbiota in the patient. (A) Representative fingerprints of denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis (DGGE) gels for fecal microbiota. The figures 1 to 32 represent the predominant bands for DNA sequencing. The closest bacterial
phylotypes corresponding to these bands are shown in Additional file 5. (B) Dendrogram generated from our DGGE analysis. The clustering
profiles were obtained from DGGE analysis using the unweighted pair group method with arithmetic average. The metric scale indicates the
degree of similarity (%). D1 to D3 denote the fecal specimens from the donor. −5d, −1d and 0d to 21d represent the fecal samples collected
from the patient 5 and 1 days before and 0 to 21 days after fecal microbiota transplantation, respectively. The 19d data are missing because there
was no fecal output at 19 days after infusion of donor feces. (C) Plot generated from the relative abundance of DGGE bands depicting our
principal component analysis of the patient’s fecal microbiota.
Li et al. Critical Care  (2015) 19:37 
Page 4 of 12
our patient when conventional strategies with antibiotics
and probiotics failed. The septic symptoms and diarrhea
were expected to improve after FMT (Additional file 1).
Our patient’s body temperature to 37.1°C at 1 day from
37.8°C prior to the infusion. There was no recurrence of
septic symptoms in the following days. Cultures of the
patient’s blood became sterile. Her stool output de-
clined after 7 days (Figure 6A). Her stools became well
formed, and the frequency and volume of her stool
returned to normal after 16 days. Our data provide evi-
dence for the beneficial effects of FMT on sepsis and
diarrhea in our patient.
Reshaping of the gut bacterial consortia by fecal
microbiota transplantation
In an effort to clarify the possible mechanism underlying
the clinical benefits achieved in our patient, we evaluated
the temporal changes of the bacterial microbiota following
FMT. Analysis of DGGE banding patterns showed that
the structure of the microbiota, especially 3 days later, was
dramatically altered, as revealed by a phylogenetic cluster
separated from those before the infusion of donor feces
(Figure 2A,B). After 14 days, the similarities between the
microbiota rose to more than 66.4% (Figure 2B), suggesting
that the community structures trended toward stability.
The data obtained from PCA further support these results
(Figure 2C).
We next identified the variations of our patient’s micro-
biota composition following FMT. As compared with day
0, a profound expansion in Firmicutes and a striking re-
duction in Proteobacteria were noted in the microbiota,
especially 6 days post-FMT (Figure 3). The families Strep-
tococcaceae, Lactobacillaceae, Eubacteriaceae and Veillo-
nellaceae were significantly increased, contributing mostly
to the recovery of the phylum Firmicutes (Figure 4).
Streptococcus pasteurianus (band 18), a main component
of the family Streptococcaceae, was presented at 2 days
postinfusion and persisted in a higher proportion until
12 days (Figure 5). In addition, the commensal organ-
isms, including Streptococcus thermophilus (band 25),
Lactobacillus plantarum (band 5), Eubacterium eligens
(band 11) and Veillonella dispar (band 32), colonized
and dominated in the microbiota after 14 days. In
contrast to this, the pathobionts of the family Entero-
bacteriaceae, especially Enterobacter cloacae, Yersinia enter-
ocolitica, Raoultella ornithinolytica, Klebsiella pneumoniae
Figure 3 Determination of the predominant bacterial composition in the fecal microbiota at the phylum level. Representative time
points were selected to show the variations of the microbiota composition following fecal microbiota transplantation.
Li et al. Critical Care  (2015) 19:37 
Page 5 of 12
and Enterobacter sp., were significantly depleted. Citrobacter
rodentium (band 1), which was absent before FMT, was in-
troduced after the treatment. The temporal shifts in the
composition of microbial communities were also seen in
the phylogenetic analysis (Additional file 6). Together, the
remarkable modification and reestablishment of the intes-
tinal microbiota in the patient may have been primarily at-
tributable to donor feces infusion.
Immunomodulatory effect of therapeutic microbial
manipulation
Before fecal transplantation, the patient showed an uncon-
trolled systemic inflammatory response, as revealed by
dramatic elevation in serum inflammatory mediators
(Figure 7A). Serum levels of TNF-α, IL-6 and IL-1β
were significantly increased, by 7.5-, 18.1- and 10.4-fold
of the upper limits of normal, respectively. Also, the pa-
tient’s IFN-γ, IL-10, IL-18 and HMGB1 values were mark-
edly elevated. After infusion of donor feces, there was a
marked decrease in IL-6, IL-10 and IFN-γ, especially after
12 days. Appreciable reductions in TNF-α and IL-1β were
seen after 13 days. The patient’s serum CRP declined
significantly after 10 days. The differentiation of Th lym-
phocytes was strikingly influenced by FMT (Figure 7B).
The proportions of Th1 and Th2 cells were restored to
baseline levels after 8 days, and their ratio went back
simultaneously. Th17 cells were reduced on day 2, and the
Th1/Th17 ratio returned to normal 8 days later.
Gut bacterial phylogroups correlate with diarrhea and
inflammatory markers
We next estimated the links between the bacterial taxa and
clinical signatures. The taxon abundance of Firmicutes and
Streptococcaceae exhibited negative correlations with the
output of stools, whereas the taxa Proteobacteria and
Enterobacteriaceae positively correlated with it (Figure 6B).
Strong associations between the relative abundance of
bacterial taxa and inflammatory markers were also found
(Figure 8A). The phylum Firmicutes and the families Strep-
tococcaceae and Lactobacillaceae were negatively correlated
with many inflammatory markers of sepsis progression,
such as IL-6, IL-18, HMGB1 and CRP. Moreover, some
members of the phylum Firmicutes also correlated posi-
tively with these parameters. Conversely, the taxon abun-
dance
of
Proteobacteria
and
Enterobacteriaceae
was
positively correlated with the parameters. Additionally,
some specific bacterial taxa showed close associations with
the
changes
in
the
distribution
of
Th
cell
subsets
(Figure 8B). The phylum Firmicutes and the species
Lactobacillus plantarum were positively associated with
the
proportion
of
Th2
cells,
whereas Proteobacteria
and
Enterobacteriaceae
negatively
correlated
with
it.
Figure 4 Changes of the predominant bacterial composition at the family level after fecal microbiota transplantation.
Li et al. Critical Care  (2015) 19:37 
Page 6 of 12
Proteobacteria and Enterobacteriaceae were negatively cor-
relative with the Th1/Th17 ratio.
Discussion
In this article, we describe a case of a patient who had
episodes of sepsis and severe diarrhea following vagot-
omy, and we report the patient’s clinical outcomes after
treatment with FMT. Our patient had an uncontrollable
inflammatory response and sepsis after undergoing a va-
gotomy. Dysbiosis of intestinal microbiota was also seen,
prompting us to incorporate FMT into the treatment
strategy. Dramatically, our patient’s septic symptoms and
severe diarrhea improved after FMT. A significant modi-
fication in intestinal microbiota following FMT was
observed to be closely associated with her clinical im-
provement. We also confirmed specific bacterial taxa
contributing to this beneficial effect. Together, our data
provide initial evidence indicating the efficacy of FMT in
the treatment of sepsis and diarrhea and provide novel
insights
into
understanding
the
basic
mechanisms
underlying the clinical benefits achieved.
Dysbiosis of intestinal microbiota is commonly seen in
patients with sepsis, and it is likely relevant to subse-
quent clinical sequelae [12,13]. In order to search for po-
tential new therapeutic strategies, we evaluated the
structure and composition of the fecal microbiota in
our patient. We show that the structure of her gut
microbiota was largely disrupted and replaced by an
“unfavorable” microbiota with a predominance of oppor-
tunistic organisms and deficiency of native residents.
The majority of the dysbiotic microbiota was dominated
by pathobionts of Proteobacteria and, more especially,
of Enterobacteriaceae, accounting for more than three-
fourths of the whole community, which is far higher
than the presentation of the healthy subjects [19,20]. In
contrast, Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes, the two major
taxa of a normal bacterial community, were greatly re-
duced in our patient. Most Eubacteriaceae, Ruminococ-
caceae
and
Lachnospiraceae
within
Firmicutes
are
beneficial to intestinal epithelial integrity [21,22]. Appar-
ently, the dysbiosis of gut microbiota is due to disturb-
ance of the whole bacterial population rather than to
overgrowth of several pathogenic organisms. It may act
synergistically with the systemic inflammatory response
to participate in the propagation of sepsis. These find-
ings enabled us to better understand the role of the in-
testinal microbial barrier in sepsis and also guided us to
treat the patient with microbiota-directed approaches.
Sepsis and septic shock are life-threatening complica-
tions attributed to the host immune system response
Figure 5 Variations of the major bacterial species in the fecal microbiota after fecal microbiota transplantation.
Li et al. Critical Care  (2015) 19:37 
Page 7 of 12
Figure 6 Stool output of the patient and the association with specific bacterial phylogroups. (A) Variations of fecal output in the patient
after fecal microbiota transplantation. Total volume of the stool was documented each day. (B) Correlations of the relative proportions of
Firmicutes, Streptococcaceae, Proteobacteria and Enterobacteriaceae with stool output per day. Correlation between two variances was estimated
using linear regression analysis with a Pearson test.
Li et al. Critical Care  (2015) 19:37 
Page 8 of 12
against microbial pathogens and/or their products, such
as endotoxin [23]. Among patients with sepsis who have
a positive bacterial culture, the Gram-negative bacteria
account for about 60% of cases, most of which originate
from the gut [11,24]. An increasing body of evidence
supports the hypothesis of gut-derived organisms as a
major source of sepsis, especially when no other appar-
ent infectious focus can be identified [11,24-26]. Leaky
gut following abdominal surgical intervention may cause
translocation of enteric microorganisms into the circula-
tion, further triggering the systemic inflammatory re-
sponse and subsequent lethal complications [27,28].
Our patient developed septic shock 4 days after under-
going surgery, and no anastomotic fistula was present.
In addition, no other infectious focus, such as intraab-
dominal free fluid or abscesses, was seen by abdominal
CT scanning (Additional file 2 and Additional file 3).
The patient’s blood cultures grew enteric organisms, in-
cluding Acinetobacter baumannii, Enterococcus faecalis
and Propionibacterium acnes. On the basis of the data,
our patient presumably had gut-derived sepsis due to in-
testinal bacteria, likely as a result of the loss of the intes-
tinal barrier after surgery.
FMT represents the therapeutic protocol that allows
the reconstitution of a disrupted intestinal microbial
community [7,29]. The perturbation of gut microbiota is
probably relevant for the etiology of sepsis, making FMT
an attractive therapeutic strategy for patients with sepsis.
However, the availability of FMT in sepsis and the mech-
anisms underlying its effects remain largely unexplored.
In this case report, we describe the use of FMT in a
patient with severe sepsis and diarrhea following vagot-
omy. Remarkably, her septic symptoms improved, and
her severe diarrhea was effectively controlled. More im-
portant is the dramatic relief of systemic inflammation
and reestablishment of innate immune equilibrium. To
understand the mechanism of the procedure in more
detail, we characterized the gut microbiota of the patient
after the FMT intervention, and we evaluated associations
between specific bacterial taxa and clinical outcomes.
Figure 7 Serum levels of inflammatory mediators in the patient before and after fecal transplantation. (A) Graphs depict the serum levels
of inflammatory mediators in the patient before and after fecal transplantation. All data are expressed as means of duplicates. The solid and
dotted lines represent the mean values of serum concentrations in healthy subjects. (B) Representative histograms illustrate flow cytometry
results as percentage of CD4+ T cells producing interferon γ (side scatter height (SSCH); IFN-γ; T helper type 1 (Th1)), interleukin (IL)-4 (Th2) and
IL-17 (Th17). (C) Changes in T helper cell subpopulations in the patient before and after fecal transplantation are depicted.
Li et al. Critical Care  (2015) 19:37 
Page 9 of 12
Following the treatment, the patient’s bacterial population
shifted strikingly toward a normal commensal pattern,
supporting the growth of the commensal Firmicutes while
eliminating a subset of Proteobacteria. The resident
bacteria derived from the donor, such as Streptococcus
pasteurianus, Streptococcus thermophilus, Lactobacillus
plantarum and Eubacterium eligens, dominated in the
reconstituted microbiota. Equally crucial is the significant
depletion of proinflammatory pathobionts in Proteobac-
teria, including Enterobacter cloacae and other Enterobac-
ter spp., Yersinia enterocolitica, Raoultella ornithinolytica
and Klebsiella pneumoniae. The data suggest that FMT
may induce a significant modification in intestinal micro-
biota and facilitate reshaping a microecological defense
barrier in the patient. Further analysis showed that se-
lective shifts of some specific bacteria following FMT
are
associated
with
clinical
improvements.
Several
members within the Firmicutes are negatively associ-
ated with inflammatory markers, whereas the patho-
bionts of Proteobacteria exhibit positive correlations
with them. Furthermore, the phyla Firmicutes and Pro-
teobacteria are associated with proportions of Th cells.
These findings indicate that elevated abundance of mul-
tiple, diverse microbial taxa within the Firmicutes and
apparent depletion of Proteobacteria following FMT are
significantly linked to alleviation of the inflammatory
response and recovery of innate immune homeostasis.
Eradication of an inappropriate immune response paral-
lels the development of the new microbial equilibrium,
providing compelling evidence for a causative role of
FMT. Our data demonstrate that FMT not only repairs
an enteric microbial barrier but also feeds back to
modulate host immunity, resulting in improvement of
clinical outcomes.
Recently, the vagal innervation of the gastrointestinal
tract has been proposed to be involved in the regulation
of the inflammatory response in animal models of sepsis
[30,31]. Vagotomies are frequently performed in patients
with gastrectomy. To date, no data are available support-
ing the effect of vagotomy on the development of sepsis
in clinical practice. Our patient experienced episodes of
septic shock 4 days after the surgical intervention; how-
ever, it was not well proven that the pathogenesis of the
sepsis was causally related to the vagotomy.
Conclusions
In this article, we report what is, to the best of our know-
ledge, the first case in the literature of a patient with sepsis
who underwent vagotomy and subsequently received
FMT, and we present preliminary results. The findings
presented here imply that FMT may be an effective means
of treating patients with severe sepsis and diarrhea. We
demonstrate that targeted manipulation of intestinal
microbiota through FMT may elicit microecological and
Figure 8 Correlation analyses between specific bacterial phylogroups and immunological parameters. Graphs depicting the taxon
abundance of many members within the phyla Firmicutes and Proteobacteria, which had strong associations with inflammatory markers
(A) and the proportions of circulating Th cells (B). CRP, C-reactive protein; HMGB-1, High-mobility group box 1; IL, Interleukin; IFN, interferon; Th,
T helper cell.
Li et al. Critical Care  (2015) 19:37 
Page 10 of 12
immunological mechanisms to maintain intestinal homeo-
stasis and protect the patient. This report provides a
wonderful example of a proof-of-concept study indicating
that FMT may represent an ideal therapeutic alternative
to control systemic inflammation in patients with sepsis.
Despite the favorable outcome, our findings were obtained
from a single patient and therefore may be considered
preliminary. It may be difficult to prove the causal rela-
tionship between the recovery of intestinal microbial
homeostasis and clinical benefits in our patient. Further
investigation with randomized clinical trials is warranted
to validate the efficacy of this procedure for sepsis and for
broader clinical use.
Key messages
 Septic symptoms and severe diarrhea in our patient
were resolved following infusion of donor feces.
 The patient’s clinical improvements were due at
least in part to recovery of intestinal microbial
homeostasis by FMT.
Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this manuscript and any accompany-
ing images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
Additional files
Additional file 1: Clinical characteristics and laboratory parameters
of the patient.
Additional file 2: Computed tomographic scans of the abdomen.
Representative images are selected to show no intraabdominal free fluid
or abscesses.
Additional file 3: Images of the patient’s abdomen obtained by
computed tomographic scanning. Detailed cross-sectional images
of the abdomen obtained before and after the vagotomy show no
intraabdominal free fluid or abscesses.
Additional file 4: Phylogenetic tree generated from the partial 16S
rDNA sequences obtained from fecal microbiota. The sequences
were aligned with closely related 16S rDNA sequences retrieved from the
GenBank database using the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST).
The tree was constructed by using the sequences of the predominant
species in the feces with MEGA software. The scale bar represents the
genetic distance.
Additional file 5: The sequence analysis of DGGE bands from the feces.
Additional file 6: Variations in phylogenetic distribution of 16S
rDNA sequences following fecal infusion. The diagrammatic
phylogenetic tree presents a summary of the rRNA sequences obtained
from DGGE bands in this study. Phyla are named to the left of the tree,
and lower taxonomic levels are given to the right. The number in the
clade is designated as the relative proportion (%) in the whole fecal
microbiota.
Abbreviations
CDI: Clostridium difficile infection; CRP: C-reactive protein; CRRT: Continuous
renal replacement therapy; CT: Computed tomography; DGGE: Denaturing
gradient gel electrophoresis; FMT: Fecal microbiota transplantation;
HMGB1: High-mobility group box 1; ICU: Intensive care unit; IFN-γ:
Interferon γ; IL: Interleukin; PCA: Principal component analysis; Th: T helper;
TNF-α: Tumor necrosis factor α; VV-ECMO: Venovenous extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
QL and JL conceived of and designed the study. CW, CT, QH, XZ and NL
performed the experiments. QL and CW analyzed the data and wrote the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Basic Research Program (973
Program) in China (2013CB531403) and the National High-tech Research and
Development Program (863 Program) of China (2012AA021007). We thank
Dr. Wenkui Yu and Dr. Tao Gao for assistance with patient treatment and
fecal sampling.
Received: 8 June 2014 Accepted: 12 January 2015
References
1.
Kamada N, Chen GY, Inohara N, Núñez G. Control of pathogens and
pathobionts by the gut microbiota. Nat Immunol. 2013;14:685–90.
2.
Round JL, Mazmanian SK. The gut microbiota shapes intestinal immune
responses during health and disease. Nat Rev Immunol. 2009;9:313–23.
Erratum in. Nat Rev Immunol. 2009;9(8):600.
3.
Bäckhed F, Ley RE, Sonnenburg JL, Peterson DA, Gordon JI. Host-bacterial
mutualism in the human intestine. Science. 2005;307:1915–20.
4.
Sekirov I, Tam NM, Jogova M, Robertson ML, Li Y, Lupp C, et al. Antibiotic-
induced perturbations of the intestinal microbiota alter host susceptibility
to enteric infection. Infect Immun. 2008;76:4726–36.
5.
Lupp C, Robertson ML, Wickham ME, Sekirov I, Champion OL, Gaynor EC,
et al. Host-mediated inflammation disrupts the intestinal microbiota and
promotes the overgrowth of Enterobacteriaceae. Cell Host Microbe.
2007;2:119–29.
6.
Chang JY, Antonopoulos DA, Kalra A, Tonelli A, Khalife WT, Schmidt TM,
et al. Decreased diversity of the fecal microbiome in recurrent Clostridium
difficile associated diarrhea. J Infect Dis. 2008;197:435–8.
7.
van Nood E, Vrieze A, Nieuwdorp M, Fuentes S, Zoetendal EG, de Vos WM,
et al. Duodenal infusion of donor feces for recurrent Clostridium difficile.
N Engl J Med. 2013;368:407–15.
8.
Hamilton MJ, Weingarden AR, Sadowsky MJ, Khoruts A. Standardized frozen
preparation for transplantation of fecal microbiota for recurrent Clostridium
difficile infection. Am J Gastroenterol. 2012;107:761–7.
9.
Martin GS, Mannino DM, Eaton S, Moss M. The epidemiology of sepsis in
the United States from 1979 through 2000. N Engl J Med. 2003;348:1546–54.
10.
Angus DC, Linde-Zwirble WT, Lidicker J, Lermont G, Carcillo J, Pinsky MR.
Epidemiology of severe sepsis in the United States: analysis of incidence,
outcome, and associated costs of care. Crit Care Med. 2001;29:1303–10.
11.
MacFie J, O’Boyle C, Mitchell CJ, Buckley PM, Johnstone D, Sudworth P.
Gut origin of sepsis: a prospective study investigating associations between
bacterial translocation, gastric microflora, and septic morbidity. Gut.
1999;45:223–8.
12.
Bauer TM, Schwacha H, Steinbrückner B, Brinkmann FE, Ditzen AK, Aponte JJ,
et al. Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth in human cirrhosis is associated with
systemic endotoxemia. Am J Gastroenterol. 2002;97:2364–70.
13.
Gerritsen J, Timmerman HM, Fuentes S, van Minnen LP, Panneman H,
Konstantinov SR, et al. Correlation between protection against sepsis by
probiotic therapy and stimulation of a novel bacterial phylotype. Appl
Environ Microbiol. 2011;77:7749–56.
14.
Dellinger RP, Levy MM, Carlet JM, Bion J, Parker MM, Jaeschke R, et al.
Surviving Sepsis Campaign: international guidelines for management of
severe sepsis and septic shock: 2008. Crit Care Med. 2008;36:296–327.
Erratum in. Crit Care Med. 2008;36(4):1394–6.
15.
Li QR, Wang CY, Tang C, He Q, Li N, Li JS. Reciprocal interaction between
intestinal microbiota and mucosal lymphocyte in cynomolgus monkeys
after alemtuzumab treatment. Am J Transplant. 2013;13:899–910.
Li et al. Critical Care  (2015) 19:37 
Page 11 of 12
16.
Saitou N, Nei M. The neighbour-joining method: a new method for
reconstructing phylogenetic trees. Mol Biol Evol. 1987;4:406–25.
17.
Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S. Molecular Evolutionary Genetics
Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol. 2007;24:1596–9.
18.
Prussin C, Metcalfe DD. Detection of intracytoplasmic cytokine using flow
cytometry and directly conjugated anti-cytokine antibodies. J Immunol
Methods. 1995;188:117–28.
19.
Costello EK, Lauber CL, Hamady M, Fierer N, Gordon JI, Knight R. Bacterial
community variation in human body habitats across space and time.
Science. 2009;326:1694–7.
20.
Dethlefsen L, McFall-Ngai M, Relman DA. An ecological and evolutionary
perspective on human-microbe mutualism and disease. Nature.
2007;449:811–8.
21.
Segain JP, Raingeard de la Blétière D, Bourreille A, Leray V, Gervois N,
Rosales C, et al. Butyrate inhibits inflammatory responses through NFκB
inhibition: implications for Crohn’s disease. Gut. 2000;47:397–403.
22.
Louis P, Flint HJ. Diversity, metabolism and microbial ecology of
butyrate-producing bacteria from the human large intestine. FEMS
Microbiol Lett. 2009;294:1–8.
23.
Cohen J. The immunopathogenesis of sepsis. Nature. 2002;420:885–91.
24.
O’Boyle C, MacFie J, Mitchell CJ, Johnstone D, Sagar PM, Sedman PC.
Microbiology of bacterial translocation in humans. Gut. 1998;42:29–35.
25.
Yu P, Martin CM. Increased gut permeability and bacterial translocation in
Pseudomonas pneumonia-induced sepsis. Crit Care Med. 2000;28:2573–7.
26.
Koch A, Meesters M, Scheller B, Boer C, Zacharowski K. Systemic endotoxin
activity correlates with clot formation: an observational study in patients
with early systemic inflammation and sepsis. Crit Care. 2013;17:R198.
27.
Salman FT, Buyruk MN, Gürler N, Celik A. The effect of surgical trauma on
the bacterial translocation from the gut. J Pediatr Surg. 1992;27:802–4.
28.
MacFie J. Current status of bacterial translocation as a cause of surgical
sepsis. Br Med Bull. 2004;71:1–11.
29.
Khoruts A, Sadowsky MJ. Therapeutic transplantation of the distal gut
microbiota. Mucosal Immunol. 2011;4:4–7.
30.
Borovikova LV, Ivanova S, Zhang M, Yang H, Botchkina GI, Watkins LR, et al.
Vagus nerve stimulation attenuates the systemic inflammatory response to
endotoxin. Nature. 2000;405:458–62.
31.
Kessler W, Diedrich S, Menges P, Ebker T, Nielson M, Partecke LI, et al. The
role of the vagus nerve: modulation of the inflammatory reaction in murine
polymicrobial sepsis. Mediators Inflamm. 2012;2012:467620.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
Li et al. Critical Care  (2015) 19:37 
Page 12 of 12
