Noninvasive detection of macrophage activation with
single-cell resolution through machine learning
Nicolas Pavillona,1, Alison J. Hobroa, Shizuo Akirab, and Nicholas I. Smitha,1
aBiophotonics Laboratory, Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871 Japan; and bHost Defense, Immunology Frontier
Research Center, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871 Japan
Edited by Jennifer Lippincott-Schwartz, Howard Hughes Medical Institute–Janelia Research Campus, Ashburn, VA, and approved February 12, 2018
(received for review July 6, 2017)
We present a method enabling the noninvasive study of minute
cellular changes in response to stimuli, based on the acquisi-
tion of multiple parameters through label-free microscopy. The
retrieved parameters are related to different attributes of the cell.
Morphological variables are extracted from quantitative phase
microscopy and autoﬂuorescence images, while molecular indica-
tors are retrieved via Raman spectroscopy. We show that these
independent parameters can be used to build a multivariate sta-
tistical model based on logistic regression, which we apply to
the detection at the single-cell level of macrophage activation
induced by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) exposure and compare their
respective performance in assessing the individual cellular state.
The models generated from either morphology or Raman can reli-
ably and independently detect the activation state of macrophage
cells, which is validated by comparison with their cytokine secre-
tion and intracellular expression of molecules related to the
immune response. The independent models agree on the degree
of activation, showing that the features provide insight into the
cellular response heterogeneity. We found that morphological
indicators are linked to the phenotype, which is mostly related
to downstream effects, making the results obtained with these
variables dose-dependent. On the other hand, Raman indicators
are representative of upstream intracellular molecular changes
related to speciﬁc activation pathways. By partially inhibiting the
LPS-induced activation using progesterone, we could identify sev-
eral subpopulations, showing the ability of our approach to iden-
tify the effect of LPS activation, speciﬁc inhibition of LPS, and also
the effect of progesterone alone on macrophage cells.
live single cell | label-free imaging | immune response | machine learning |
cellular heterogeneity
R
ecent research in cell biology has demonstrated the need to
be able to analyze large populations at single-cell level, as
individual variations have to be taken into account to accurately
assess complex biological behaviors such as response to drugs (1),
cell fate (2), or concurrent mechanisms of cellular death (3). This
cellular heterogeneity has been studied through various tech-
niques, providing insight at different levels. The most prominent
method in past years has been ﬂuorescence-activated cell sort-
ing (FACS), which enables the identiﬁcation of cell subpopula-
tions with high throughput (4). More recently, new techniques
have emerged, such as single-cell sequencing enabling detailed
studies of RNA expression (5), as well as multiplexing analytic
approaches for the parallel detection of secreted molecules (6,
7), that provide very speciﬁc insight, but at the cost of being
destructive.
Microscopy also provides a natural way of retrieving single-
cell information and assessing heterogeneity of the population,
although its throughput is usually lower than commonly used
methods such as FACS. The speciﬁcity of imaging approaches
is typically provided by the use of chemically speciﬁc labels,
such as to study the heterogeneity of protein expression under
stimulation (8). Instead, we use here a multimodal label-free
imaging approach that combines quantitative phase microscopy
(QPM), Raman spectroscopy, and autoﬂuorescence (AF) imag-
ing, hence simultaneously providing quantitative information on
both cellular morphology and molecular content (9). We then
use that information to generate models based on training mea-
surements that can be used to noninvasively study cellular states
and responses to stimuli at single-cell level.
These methods have been used independently for various
studies in cell biology. In particular, QPM has been used, for
example, to derive indicators based on the dry mass to study
cell cycle (10, 11), extract temporal signals as early indicators
of cell death processes (12), or as an overall indicator of bacte-
rial infection in macrophages (13) and inﬂammation in histolog-
ical preparations (14). More recently, parameters derived from
QPM have also been used with machine learning methods for
applications such as cell viability (15), red blood cell classiﬁca-
tion (16), identiﬁcation of bacterial spores (17), or algae assess-
ment in ﬂow cytometry (18, 19). Machine learning and statistical
analysis based on feature extraction from QPM images can also
be used for microorganism (20) and stem cell (21) identiﬁcation
and classiﬁcation.
Raman spectroscopy has also been extensively used to discrim-
inate cell types based on differences in their molecular content,
such as in the case of cancer cells (22) or tumor detection (23,
24). It has also been used for temporal studies, for instance,
Signiﬁcance
We developed a method enabling the noninvasive study of
ﬁne cellular responses that we applied to macrophage acti-
vation. The technique is based on a multimodal label-free
microscopy system that simultaneously retrieves both mor-
phological and molecular information based on quantitative
phase imaging and Raman spectroscopy, respectively. The
parameters obtained from these measurements are processed
through a machine learning algorithm that makes it possible
to reliably assess the macrophage activation state at single-
cell level. We found that while each parameter set (morphol-
ogy and Raman) can detect the activation state, they pro-
vide complementary information. Morphology is symptomatic
of downstream phenotypes that make the detection dose-
dependent, while Raman is indicative of upstream molecular
changes that enable the detection of selective inhibition of
activation pathways.
Author contributions: N.P. and N.I.S. designed research; N.P. performed research; N.P.,
A.J.H., S.A., and N.I.S. analyzed data; N.P. and N.I.S. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Published under the PNAS license.
Data deposition: Data extracted from our images and Raman spectra are available at
dx.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1135372.
1To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: n-pavillon@ifrec.osaka-u.ac.jp or
nsmith@ap.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1711872115/-/DCSupplemental.
Published online March 6, 2018.
E2676–E2685
|
PNAS
|
vol. 115
|
no. 12
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1711872115
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by UCOP University of California Office of the President on April 1, 2025 from IP address 128.48.53.147.
BIOPHYSICS AND
COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY
IMMUNOLOGY AND
INFLAMMATION
to detect the initiation of cell death processes (25, 26). Raman
spectroscopy has often relied on multivariate analysis and
chemometrics for extracting information from the highly mul-
tidimensional spectral data (27), as well as advanced machine
learning methods (28). It has been shown recently that the com-
bination of QPM and Raman could also be used to discriminate
various types of immune cells (29).
We here combine these two approaches (imaging and spec-
troscopy) and compare their respective performances, charac-
teristics, and stability on measurements performed over sev-
eral months to study macrophage activation, which is a complex
process involving numerous pathways as well as down-regulating
mechanisms, where it has also been shown that different acti-
vation pathways entail different cellular functions (30). In par-
ticular, we study the response of macrophage-like cells to
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), which is known to act mainly through
the Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) (31), although several other
receptors are also involved (32).
The label-free methods used here embody a global detection
approach, where measurements are indicative of the overall cel-
lular phenotype and the presence of endogenous molecules. Indi-
cators that can be derived from these data through empirical
statistical analysis show highly useful information, which can
complement more classical techniques that rely on labeling a pri-
ori known effector molecules. Especially for biological phenom-
ena where no single deﬁnitive marker is available for identiﬁca-
tion (33), or for applications requiring dynamic studies (34), our
approach can elucidate behaviors at the single-cell level and with
relatively high throughput.
Results
We developed a multimodal system that can measure several
label-free signals that are then used for assessing cellular state
or response, such as in the case of macrophage activation. The
overall procedure, including measurement protocols and gener-
ation of statistical models, is described in detail in Materials and
Methods, and an overview of the whole process is given in Fig.
1. Brieﬂy, the system allows simultaneous acquisition of QPM
images through an interferometric microscope and Raman cel-
lular spectra with a scanning microscope (9, 35). A set of ﬂipping
mirrors also enable the recording of AF images through a wide-
ﬁeld epiﬂuorescence system.
Images were then processed to get matched ﬁelds of view,
and cells were segmented through an automated software (Cell-
Proﬁler), which also extracted morphological features based, for
instance, on size or intensity values by using the quantitative
values from QPM and AF images. The Raman spectra were
baseline compensated and decomposed into orthogonal signals
through principal component analysis (PCA). The measured val-
ues retrieved from spectroscopy were often correlated, as in the
neighborhood of a spectral band; generating the model based on
the uncorrelated PCA coefﬁcients ensured a better-conditioned
problem.
The morphological parameters and PC scores were initially
used along with the a priori information about stimulation condi-
tions from training datasets to generate a statistical model ﬁtted
with penalized logistic regression (see SI Text for details). This
model could then be used to assess new samples, without a pri-
ori information, including data measured on later days or with
different conditions. The model outputs a probability of activa-
tion, suitable for binary classiﬁcation. To analyze population dis-
tributions, we also linearized the probability values distribution
along a logistic function for scoring the degree of individual cell
response in various situations. Unless speciﬁed otherwise, all our
displayed data are predictions on unknown samples measured on
a given day, but based on a model generated from data measured
on different days, typically days or weeks before.
Label-Free Indicators Can Detect Macrophage Activation. We ap-
plied this approach to macrophage cells stimulated with LPS
(1,000 ng/mL) during 24 h and generated models based on the
known state of stimulation (control or exposed to LPS) either
from morphological or Raman measurements. We then used
these models to retrieve an activation probability for individual
cells measured on a different day, as shown in Fig. 2 A and B,
respectively (data from several days including training and test
sets are shown in Figs. S1 and S2). The activation status at the
population level for each culture dish was conﬁrmed by con-
sidering the levels of tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) in the
culture medium (Fig. 2 C and D). The results showed that the
overall activation probabilities were in agreement with cytokine
production.
Models were derived from data measured on given days (mor-
phology: 1 d, 8 dishes, n = 2,235; Raman: 3 d, 12 dishes, n =
1,824) and used for binary classiﬁcation assessing exposure to
LPS, leading to an overall accuracy of 84–87%, as shown in Table
1, where confusion matrices are shown for both models (mor-
phology and Raman) and for training and testing conditions.
It is possible to see that both results are consistent in all sub-
classes. Despite their comparable overall performance, the two
indicators have different features. In particular, the morpholog-
ical one seems biased toward resting cells, with a high accuracy
for control cells, but with a signiﬁcant portion of LPS-exposed
cells being identiﬁed as resting. In contrast, the Raman indica-
tor shows more balanced ratios between false positives and false
negatives. This suggests that a subpopulation of cells exposed to
LPS has a morphology similar to resting cells, while still express-
ing molecules related to activation.
One should note that the assessment of statistical models is
often performed through cross-validation or by keeping a subset
of the data out of the training set for further tests. These val-
idations can, however, provide overﬁtted models for data mea-
sured in rather similar conditions, which are then unstable when
used on data taken at a later time or under different condi-
tions. Validation was therefore performed with data obtained on
different days to test the model’s performance in cases where
system and specimen conditions can vary. We ensured that our
training set size was sufﬁciently large to generate accurate mod-
els by computing the cross-entropy of our computed activation
probabilities (see SI Text for details) based on models gener-
ated from an increasingly large amount of samples and for dif-
ferent values of the penalty parameter λ (Figs. S1 and S2). These
tests, based on ensuring reproducibility between training and
test datasets, indicated that the chosen λ (0.033 and 0.015 for
morphology and Raman, respectively) are suitable. Higher val-
ues led to larger cross-entropy, indicating less accurate mod-
els, while lower values increased the difference between training
and test data, which is symptomatic of overﬁtted models. Based
on these results, the required sample size for generating stable
statistical models was ∼500 samples in the case of morphologi-
cal data and ∼750 for spectral data. This larger requirement in
the Raman case is consistent with our observation that spectral
data were more sensitive to day-to-day variations, so that the
model had to be generated from several days of experiments
to reach an accurate representation. Furthermore, the clearer
separation obtained with Raman indicators in the results above
was also visible through the cross-entropy, which reached ∼0.51
at full sample size for Raman, while morphological indicators
attained 0.59.
These results also demonstrate the stability of the models,
which can provide reproducible results over months, as shown
in Fig. S1, where the cross-entropy is shown for data measured
at different times after the training set, ranging from 1 d to
4 mo. For datasets taken at later times, it is possible to iden-
tify a small reduction in accuracy when increasing the amount of
Pavillon et al.
PNAS
|
vol. 115
|
no. 12
|
E2677
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by UCOP University of California Office of the President on April 1, 2025 from IP address 128.48.53.147.
500
1000
1500
2800
-0.10
-0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
Intensity [a.u.]
Raman shift [cm
-1]
500
1000
1500
2800
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Intensity [cnt]
Raman shift [cm
-1]
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
Intensity [cnt]
Raman shift [cm
-1]
Spectra processing
Laser 532 nm
Spectrometer
Laser 
diode
DHM laser
Raman excitation
Raman emission
Fluorescence 
excitation
Fluorescence 
emission
Mercury lamp
Generation of model
Classification
Scoring
Auto-fluorescence
Quantitative phase
Cellular Raman spectra
Optical setup
Measurement procedure
Image processing
Image registration
Cell segmentation
Baseline correction
Spectra alignment
Principal component analysis
A priori information
Logistic regression / LASSO
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
0
25
50
75
100
125
Sample amount
Score
0
200 400 600 800 100012001400
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Sample class
Sample no.
0
200 400 600 800 100012001400
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Probability
Sample no.
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Probability
Cell score
Fig. 1.
Measurement and data treatment principle, where morphological and spectral parameters are used to generate a statistical model that allows for
analysis of new cellular data taken in later experiments for classiﬁcation and scoring.
variables. This shows the effect of overﬁtting in the model, where
accuracy can be increased, but only for data taken in rather sim-
ilar conditions. It is also possible to identify that the accuracy
obtained for the test morphological data is better than for the
training set (Table 1). This can be explained by the fact that
some cells in the training sets are not in the expected state, such
as exposed but not activated by LPS, or spontaneously activated
cells. This is also an indication of the stability of the models with
strong penalty values, where no signiﬁcant loss of accuracy can
be identiﬁed in our results.
The required sample size derived above is signiﬁcantly higher
than some reported requirements for Raman spectroscopy (36),
which can be understood by considering that the biological dif-
ferences observed here (i.e., reversible changes within identical
E2678
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1711872115
Pavillon et al.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by UCOP University of California Office of the President on April 1, 2025 from IP address 128.48.53.147.
BIOPHYSICS AND
COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY
IMMUNOLOGY AND
INFLAMMATION
A
B
C
D
Fig. 2.
Single-cell activation probability measured with morphological (A
and C) and spectral (B and D) indicators. For each dataset, the activation
levels are validated by measuring the expression of TNF-α in the culture
medium of the same dishes used to extract the label-free indicators (C and
D). All results are representative of at least three experiments; error bars
indicate SD between triplicates.
cells) should be ﬁner in nature than cell-to-cell differences in pre-
vious studies that performed only classiﬁcation between differ-
ent cell types. On the other hand, the sample sizes required here
are comparable with those reported in the case of deep learn-
ing methods based on label-free imaging for cell-type classiﬁ-
cation (18).
Models Allow for Biological Interpretation. A signiﬁcant advantage
of linear models, as used here, is that the results can be easily
interpreted, since the obtained coefﬁcients are linearly related
to the importance of the underlying parameter in terms of abil-
ity to separate the two classes. Furthermore, the lasso approach
constrains the parameters so that variables with less separating
power are shrunk to zero, and the amount of variables to inter-
pret is then signiﬁcantly reduced in the ﬁnal model.
In the case of the morphological model, 15 of the 301 vari-
ables were retained (all coefﬁcients in Fig. S3A and Table S1).
It is interesting to note that some variables of all types (shape,
intensity, texture, etc.) were selected in the automatically gener-
ated model, meaning that activation is related to a variety of fea-
tures rather than just one type, which highlights the usefulness of
using a multivariate approach. The values of the ﬁve largest coef-
ﬁcients for control and stimulated cells in the training dataset are
shown in Fig. 3A, illustrating the degree of difference induced by
individual variables. It is also important to note that, although
statistical signiﬁcance is valuable information, it is not always
directly correlated with the capability of a variable to discrimi-
nate between two classes, as illustrated by the ﬁfth best variable,
which does not appear as signiﬁcant.
Furthermore, several variables can then be interpreted in
terms of biological meaning. For example, the most important
parameter, AF integrated intensity, is of direct biological signif-
icance, as it is known that activated macrophages have higher
levels of intracellular reactive oxygen species such as nitric oxide
(NO) (37) that can be observed by AF (38). Other parameters
indicate changes of the cell shape and intracellular density dis-
tribution that are consistent with previous studies showing that
the activation state inﬂuences cell morphology, although these
variations strongly depend on the cell type (33).
Similarly, the coefﬁcients for Raman indicators could also be
extracted (Fig. S3B), where each coefﬁcient is related to a PCA
loading vector. It is possible to see that all 36 retained coefﬁcients
were within the ﬁrst 66 scores, which accounted for 89.22% of the
variance in the data (Fig. S3C), with coefﬁcient values decreasing
for higher coefﬁcients. The linear combination of the coefﬁcients
with their corresponding loading vector leads to a continuous
function in the spectral domain, as shown in Fig. 3B. This rep-
resents the spectral features that characterize either resting or
stimulated cells and should be related to the compositional dif-
ferences between the states. As measured cells were genetically
identical clones, observed spectral differences should be related
to transcription/translation in the cell resulting from stimulation.
A combination of proteins, transcription factors, mRNA, and
other molecules would then be expected to compose this spec-
tral separation vector.
The main feature to note in the separation vector is actually
the absence of most of the common molecules typically observed
in the Raman spectrum of a cell cytosol, such as lipids, proteins,
and amino acids. In particular, the CH (2,873; 2,931 cm−1) as
well as CH2 (2,888; 2,926 cm−1) stretching, indicative of lipids,
was mostly negligible. Furthermore, several peaks indicative of
protein secondary structure (39), such as H-bonded CO stretch
(1,650; 1,670–1,680 cm−1) were not present. This suggests that
the differences between control and stimulated cells were more
subtle than just a change in overall molecular concentrations.
Additionally, this absence of signiﬁcant lipid contribution shows
that the results were not directly affected by the presence of
LPS. Several features in the separation vector toward control can
be related to nucleotides, with adenine (730; 1,488 cm−1) and
guanine (661; 1,118 cm−1) being particularly indicative of non-
stimulated cells, along with other features (tyrosine, 1,180 cm−1;
ribose, 1,017 cm−1) (40, 41). Spectral features associated with
stimulation are also indicative of ribose (926; 1,017 cm−1) and
phenylalanine (1,180 cm−1).
Cellular Heterogeneity Inﬂuences Models. As shown previously, the
classiﬁcation performance for determining activation on a single-
cell level is ∼85%. While this level of speciﬁcity may not appear
extremely high, it should be noted that this assessment relies on
the hypothesis that all measured cells in a control dish are rest-
ing, while all cells exposed to LPS have a 100% probability of
being activated, which can be expected to be overly simplistic. It
is known, for example, that cells can experience LPS tolerance
after an initial stimulation (42).
To further validate our approach, we compared our label-free
classiﬁcation with the intracellular levels of inducible NO syn-
thase (iNOS), an enzyme known to be involved in the immune
response by promoting the production of NO (43). This enzyme
was selected as an activation indicator, as it displays a gradual
increase over several hours upon LPS stimulation (44, 45). Fol-
lowing label-free measurements, cells were immediately ﬁxed for
subsequent immunostaining, enabling the measurement of the
same cells measured with our approach, as shown in Fig. 4A. To
derive a metric of activation level based on its expression, we
segmented the cytoplasm of individual cells and used the overall
iNOS signal as an indicator of activation.
Table 1.
Confusion matrices of activation classiﬁcation for both
morphological and Raman measurements, given for both training
and test data
Predicted, % (training/test)
Actual
Resting
Stimulated
Morpho (84.34/87.79)
Control
92.94/96.38
7.06/3.62
LPS
30.13/27.05
69.87/72.95
Raman (86.4/85.59)
Control
85.20/84.46
14.80/15.54
LPS
12.39/13.28
87.61/86.72
Pavillon et al.
PNAS
|
vol. 115
|
no. 12
|
E2679
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by UCOP University of California Office of the President on April 1, 2025 from IP address 128.48.53.147.
A
B
Fig. 3.
(A) Average values of parameters from training data having the
largest coefﬁcients (value indicated in graph) in the morphological model
for control and stimulated cells, respectively (values are normalized in
regards to control ones, error bars indicate SD between coefﬁcients). Each
morphological parameter is extracted from either AF or QPM. Diff., differ-
ence. ***P < 0.001; n.s., P ≥0.05. (B) Difference Raman vector between
stimulated and control cells obtained from model coefﬁcients (dashed, orig-
inal values; line, LOESS-smoothed data).
The comparison of the iNOS levels with both spectral (Fig.
4C) and morphological (Fig. 4D) predictions showed good
agreement, where activation scores (obtained by linearizing the
probability values; SI Text) were displayed. This result also held
for outlier cells that appeared activated despite the absence of
stimulation or cells appearing as resting, even under LPS expo-
sure. This indicated that most cells which received an indetermi-
nate activation score in one method were consistently shown as
having an unclear activation state in the two other independent
methods, suggesting that the binary hypothesis where all cells
exposed to LPS become stimulated was not correct, leading to an
underestimation of the performance of the model. This implied
that we would be able to further probe the performance of our
method and likely also improve the models at the training stage,
if a fail-safe external indication of the activation at the single-
cell level was available, and by only using strongly activated cells
during training, or by taking into account the activation degree
directly into the model.
Interestingly, the two label-free indicators actually appeared
to provide better separation between resting and activated cells
(Fig. 4B) than the iNOS levels. This may have been due to var-
ious factors, such as the difﬁculty of generating accurate indi-
cators based on ﬂuorescence, where photobleaching or staining
efﬁciency may affect the measured intensity. It has also been
shown that the expression of speciﬁc molecules in individual acti-
vated cells can vary signiﬁcantly (6), so that the monitoring of a
single molecule may be less accurate than global indicators such
as those measured in our approach.
Up to this point, the two measurements (morphology and
Raman) have been used independently to analyze their perfor-
mance separately. It is also possible to join all parameters, poten-
tially yielding more accurate models by accumulating uncorre-
lated variables for prediction, as suggested by the separation
displayed in Fig. 4B. However, tests at this point performed on
larger datasets spread on several weeks only showed a small
increase in performance to 88% (unbiased). As discussed above,
this could be attributed to the fact that the perceived lack of per-
formance (<90% accuracy) was in part resulting from real pop-
ulation heterogeneity at the single cell level, and it would not
be expected that combining the discriminatory power of the two
independent modes should change this signiﬁcantly.
Morphological Indicators Are Dose-Dependent, but Spectral Ones Are
Not. To assess the detection sensitivity of the label-free indica-
tors, we performed measurements with various concentrations of
LPS. We ﬁrst performed dosage experiments for TNF-α produc-
tion in well plates, and from the results (Fig. S4), we used a range
where the cytokine production underwent the most signiﬁcant
rise, as well as a 1,000 ng/mL stimulation, where the response
already appeared saturated.
As described previously, a model was trained based on
an experiment comparing control and stimulated cells with
1,000 ng/mL LPS. The model was then used to derive the acti-
vation scores of cells exposed to concentrations of 0, 10, 50, and
1,000 ng/mL. As shown in Fig. 5A, the average morphological
score of each cell population gradually increased with dosage.
Furthermore, the distribution spread broadened compared with
control responses, suggesting more heterogeneous features from
stimulated cells. The single cell responses were compared with
TNF-α production (Fig. 5B), where the activation scores showed
Control
LPS
C
D
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
iNOS signal
Morpho score
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
iNOS signal
Raman score
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
Raman score
Morpho score
Control
LPS
A
B
Fig. 4.
(A) Typical immunoﬂuorescence images of iNOS (green) with
nuclear counterstaining (red) on control and LPS-stimulated Raw264 cells.
(Scale bar: 10 µm.) (B–D) Paired measurements of label-free activation
scores (both morphological and spectral) compared with cytosolic levels of
iNOS (n = 541; 2 d), showing good agreement in the identiﬁcation of acti-
vated cells.
E2680
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1711872115
Pavillon et al.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by UCOP University of California Office of the President on April 1, 2025 from IP address 128.48.53.147.
BIOPHYSICS AND
COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY
IMMUNOLOGY AND
INFLAMMATION
A
B
0.0
1
10
100
1000
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
Activation score
LPS [ng/mL]
-2000
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
TNF-α [pg/mL]
Control
Fig. 5.
(A) Activation score distributions based on morphological indicators
for stimulation from different LPS concentrations, showing gradual increase
with concentration (n = 2,284). Results are representative of at least three
experiments. (B) Comparison of scores with TNF-α production. Box plots
illustrate the spread within cells populations (box, quartiles; whiskers, mini-
mum/maximum values); error bars indicate the SD within nine dishes.
a more linear dependence on LPS dose than cytokine produc-
tion, which was concentrated in the 10- to 50-ng/mL region, along
with saturation at higher dosage, in accordance with standard
tests (Fig. S4). While the cytokine levels across the whole dish
showed much lower spread than the single cell responses, due to
the thousands of cells globally assessed in the TNF-α assay, there
were still signiﬁcant differences in cytokine concentration, which
can be attributed, for example, to the varying number of cells
per dish.
For these dose–response experiments, the Raman indicators
here exhibited a different behavior compared with morphol-
ogy (Fig. S5). While shifts in average scores could be identiﬁed
for stimulation concentrations at 10 and 50 ng/mL, no gradual
increase was observed, and these populations had scores much
closer to control than to cells stimulated with 1,000 ng/mL, sug-
gesting that the molecular changes measured by Raman were not
changing linearly with the stimulation concentration. This would
be consistent with the complexity of the cellular immune response
that involves multiple up- and down-regulating pathways.
Label-Free Indicators Can Detect Selective Stimulation Inhibition.
One potential advantage of label-free indicators is that by mea-
suring the cell state as a whole, rather than one particular indi-
cator of activation, it may be possible to discern more subtle
changes in individual cells, rather than simply activated vs. non-
activated classes. To assess this, we also tested our approach in
combination with a selective inhibitor of LPS activation. Pro-
gesterone (Prog) is known to inhibit the release of TNF-α (46)
as well as NO (47) in macrophages. It selectively inhibits the
transcription of NF-κB (48) and also promotes the expression
of SOCS1, a cytokine known to negatively regulate the TLR4
cascade (49).
When applying a model of activation based on cells stimu-
lated with the same LPS concentration (50 ng/mL), pretreatment
with Prog (10 µM) resulted in cells that still indicated activa-
tion, but showed signiﬁcantly reduced scores both in morphol-
ogy and Raman indicators, as shown in Fig. 6 A and B, respec-
tively. This result was consistent with the cytokine levels, where
pretreatment by Prog signiﬁcantly reduced TNF-α production in
stimulated cells (Fig. 6C). On the other hand, unstimulated cells
pretreated with the inhibitor displayed similar scores in morphol-
ogy as control, but showed signiﬁcant differences in their Raman
scores. These results suggested that, while Prog did not signif-
icantly affect the morphology when used in isolation, it caused
by itself changes in intracellular content that can be discerned by
Raman measurements.
Since the above results indicate that the cells treated with
LPS and/or Prog exhibit a more complex behavior than pure
activation, we also used a multinomial classiﬁcation scheme,
which generates independent models to separate each class from
each other (Fig. S6), yielding probabilities of belonging to each
class. This approach allows for the separation of effects induced
by LPS and Prog and for studying behaviors induced by these
two molecules which may not be purely additive. We used the
scores of having been exposed to LPS or Prog to assess the links
between the two treatments, as shown in Fig. 7 A and B for mor-
phology and Raman indicators, respectively.
In cell morphology, it is possible to see a strong anticorrela-
tion between the effect of LPS and Prog, where stimulated cells
have an increased LPS score, along with a lower Prog score. Con-
versely, pretreated cells are close to control ones, but show a
wider spread, with a tendency toward lower LPS scores. Con-
currently exposed cells follow this trend, by being located mostly
between control and LPS ones. This suggests a “continuum”
in morphology features, along which cells are located, provid-
ing mostly the same information as the binomial analysis given
in Fig. 6A.
This anticorrelation can also be identiﬁed in the Raman indi-
cators for LPS and Prog cells, but the Prog cells are more clearly
separated from the control ones. Furthermore, LPS+Prog cells
are also more separated, with comparable Prog scores as exposed
to LPS, but with a much lower LPS score. This suggests that it is
possible to detect underlying molecular changes, both from expo-
sure to Prog and also from the inhibition of LPS activation by
this molecule. Interestingly, it is also possible to identify several
similarities between the four Raman separation vectors in a four-
class multinomial model and the activation vector obtained pre-
viously in the binomial case (Fig. S6 A2–D2 and Fig. 3B, respec-
tively). While this is expected between the two LPS vectors, one
should still note that the derivation procedure is different in the
two cases, as all classes, including Prog and Prog+LPS, are sep-
arated from LPS in the multinomial case. Nevertheless, several
features, including the peak shift at 1,400 cm−1 and the negative
region at ∼1,100 cm−1, as well as the main peak at 904 cm−1
are present in both vectors. Furthermore, it is also possible to
see that some features present in the Prog+LPS vector—such as
the large positive peak ∼1,180 cm−1—are also visible in the main
LPS vector, but not the multinomial one, which may indicate that
some spectral features are pathway-dependent.
Discussion
The method we propose here, by generating statistical mod-
els based on label-free cellular morphology and molecular
content parameters, can identify LPS-induced macrophage acti-
vation within a population of genetically identical cells. While the
Pavillon et al.
PNAS
|
vol. 115
|
no. 12
|
E2681
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by UCOP University of California Office of the President on April 1, 2025 from IP address 128.48.53.147.
A
B
C
Morphology
Raman
n.s
***
0
50
100
150
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
TNF-α [pg/mL]
-
-
-
+
+
+
+
-
 LPS
Prog
Fig. 6.
(A and B) Activation score distributions with 50 ng/mL LPS and pre-
treatmentwith progesterone(Prog)forbothmorphological(A;n=3,760) and
spectral (B; n = 2,487; 5 d) indicators, showing a decrease of the scores for
inhibition of LPS activation by Prog, compared with positive control. Results
are representative of at least three experiments. (C) TNF-α production for LPS
stimulation and Prog pretreatment. Results are the average of nine dishes
per experiment; error bars represent SD. ***P < 0.001; n.s., P ≥0.05.
two indicators are independent, in terms of both acquisition pro-
cedure and of information they exploit, the results on the degree
of activation assessed by paired measurements are in agree-
ment, showing a correlation between morphological and molec-
ular changes occurring during activation. The results obtained by
the two indicators are also in good agreement with external vali-
dation performed by measuring iNOS levels, where the compar-
ison showed that certain cells could be considered misclassiﬁed
based purely on their initial conditions, which is not necessarily
representative of the actual cellular activation state.
It is interesting that the two independent models give highly
correlated predictors of individual cell states, since the two mea-
surement approaches are signiﬁcantly different. The morpho-
logical parameters are extracted from wide-ﬁeld images that
can provide a relatively high throughput due to the presence
of numerous cells in each ﬁeld of view. The throughput can be
A
B
Fig. 7.
Density maps for cell populations having been exposed to LPS
and/or Prog, obtained from multinomial classiﬁcation, for both morpholog-
ical (A; n = 10,094) and Raman (B; n = 1,741) indicators.
E2682
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1711872115
Pavillon et al.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by UCOP University of California Office of the President on April 1, 2025 from IP address 128.48.53.147.
BIOPHYSICS AND
COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY
IMMUNOLOGY AND
INFLAMMATION
limited more by the computational power required to segment
the cell image data and extract parameters (size, texture, etc.)
rather than the actual measurement time. Raman spectroscopy,
on the other hand, has inherently lower acquisition throughput
due to the small vibrational cross-section of biomolecules. It is
optimized here by taking one spectrum per cell while scanning
the beam through the cell to obtain a representative spectrum
(35). The point-based Raman detection method still does not
reach the throughput of the wide-ﬁeld imaging mode, although it
could be improved by further automating the acquisition proce-
dure. On the other hand, acquired spectra can then be used in a
straightforward manner for the assessment of macrophage acti-
vation with much less data postprocessing compared with wide-
ﬁeld imaging.
Our results also indicate that the two models are indicative
of different biological processes and provide information that
can be used in conjunction for a better understanding of the
macrophage activation state. Morphological variables appear to
be more symptomatic of downstream effects which affect the cel-
lular phenotype as an end result, while Raman indicators can
be related to upstream effects linked to intracellular molecu-
lar changes occurring upon LPS stimulation. These differences
can be identiﬁed ﬁrst by the fact that a signiﬁcant subpopula-
tion of LPS-exposed cells seem to show little change in morphol-
ogy and appear similar to control cells, leading to a loss of speci-
ﬁcity in detection. This is, however, not the case with molecular
indicators, which have similar sensitivity/speciﬁcity rates (Table
1), showing that, despite comparable morphologies, these cells
undergo molecular changes indicative of LPS-induced activation.
In particular, the preferential display of features indicative to
adenine, along with phosphate-related bands [904 cm−1 (41);
Fig. 3B] toward control may indicate an ATP depletion in stim-
ulated cells, a phenomenon that has been conﬁrmed in alveolar
macrophages (50).
The differences between the two indicators can also be iden-
tiﬁed in the subsequent results, where the morphological indica-
tors respond in a dose-dependent manner, while Raman indica-
tors at intermediate LPS doses (10 and 50 ng/mL) appear very
close to control cells. This again suggests that morphological
parameters are related to downstream effects that are dependent
on the level of stimulation, while molecular changes occurring
under different stimulation doses cannot be linearly related. The
fact that the scores of both lower-dosage conditions are clearly
closer to control than stimulation may also suggest a threshold
behavior at detection level, where the spectral features used to
identify strong LPS exposure (1,000 ng/mL) are not present at
lower dosage.
Furthermore, the conjugate use of Prog, a known inhibitor
of LPS-induced activation, shows that cell morphology indica-
tors indeed exhibit the reduction of activation score by pretreat-
ment with Prog, but no clear difference between control and
pretreated cells was seen. On the other hand, molecular indica-
tors clearly show distinct populations for the four possible com-
binations of LPS and Prog, indicative of upstream molecular
changes for all conditions, despite similar phenotypes. A ﬁner
analysis, based on a model aimed at independently separating
all classes, shows that Raman indicators can separate all exper-
imental conditions, and provide clear subpopulations for con-
trol, LPS-induced activation, Prog exposure, and Prog-inhibited
LPS stimulation. The capability of discriminating these condi-
tions is in agreement with reported effects of Prog, which is
known to act as a selective inhibitor of the TLR4 activation cas-
cade (48, 49), but also to independently promote alternative acti-
vation of macrophages (51), which seemingly induces molecular
changes without signiﬁcant phenotype modiﬁcations in the time
frames of our experiments. Furthermore, the separation vectors
we retrieve in case of separating the different subclasses of acti-
vation with inhibition are very comparable with the one obtained
with simple activation (Fig. 3B and Fig. S6 A2–D2). However,
several features present in the original activation vector are dis-
played only in speciﬁc vectors of the multinomial classiﬁcation,
namely, activated with LPS but with or without progesterone
inhibition. This suggests that some molecular changes observed
here which indicate macrophage activation are also pathway-
dependent.
The method we present is a global approach that takes overall
parameters which are derived from endogenous contrast, mak-
ing them less speciﬁc than labels bonding to particular molecules
such as proteins or cytokines. The model derived from these
variables is then made speciﬁc to the particular studied pro-
cess through supervised learning. The results do, however, show
that the label-free indicators can have better separation capa-
bilities than speciﬁc immune response-related proteins, which
could be explained by the overall approach used here, compared
with the monitoring of a single molecule. The label-free mod-
els are, however, also inﬂuenced by other factors, as shown by
the spread of control populations, even in the case of genetically
identical clone cells, and processes such as the cell cycle can sig-
niﬁcantly affect both morphology and molecular content. Nev-
ertheless, this approach can accurately identify a complex pro-
cess such as macrophage activation. It is also interesting to note
that stimulated populations have a larger spread than control
ones, which indicates a higher degree of heterogeneity within the
cell responses and within the activation state itself. This would
be consistent with the effects of LPS-induced activation, which
possesses numerous up- and down-regulating mechanisms that
should affect single-cell response levels.
Overall, our technique provides a highly noninvasive approach
to assess complex biological behaviors at the single-cell level.
We showed that the models were providing stable assessment
for data taken over several months, which is critical if this
approach is to be used for reliable biological measurements,
since it accounts for typical drifts in both the instrumentation and
in cell conditions, which occur commonly but are challenging to
quantify. The technique is sensitive enough to observe stimula-
tion in a dose-dependent manner, as well as detecting the inhibi-
tion of particular activation pathways. While we applied it here
to LPS-induced macrophage activation, the general approach
can be used for the study of other phenomena, where speciﬁc
models can be created based on the same measurement pro-
cedure in different conditions for the supervised learning pro-
cess. It provides a means to discriminate subtle changes in cell
response, either on the single-cell level or with greater statistical
power on a population level. As the approach is noninvasive, it
can be combined with other single-cell methodologies and exist-
ing wet lab techniques. Its nondestructiveness and the absence
of any chemical alteration of the samples make this approach
particularly suitable for dynamic measurements and temporal
studies.
Materials and Methods
Cell Preparation and Stimulation. Raw264 cells (Riken BioResource Center)
were cultured in 10-cm Petri dishes and immersed in DMEM (Nacalai) supple-
mented with 10% FBS (Gibco) and penicillin/streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich)
with, respectively, 10,000 units and 10 mg/mL diluted at 10 mL/L and incu-
bated at 37 ◦C in a humidiﬁed atmosphere containing 5% CO2. Cells were
trypsinyzed with a solution containing 0.25% trypsin and 1 mM EDTA
(Nacalai) for approximately 5 min at 37 ◦C to detach them from the dish.
They were then plated on 3.5-cm quartz-bottom dishes (FPI) at a density of
20,000 cells per cm2 and then incubated again as described above. Quartz
substrates were previously coated with poly-L-lysine (PLL) by immersing the
surface in a 0.01% PLL solution (Sigma-Aldrich) during 30 min at room tem-
perature (RT). The surface was then washed with deionized water and left
to dry for 2–3 h at RT before plating the cells.
After ∼24 h, the culture medium was replaced by fresh medium contain-
ing the stimulating agent. For standard stimulation, LPS from Escherichia
coli (Sigma-Aldrich) stock was prepared by diluting it in phosphate buffer
Pavillon et al.
PNAS
|
vol. 115
|
no. 12
|
E2683
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by UCOP University of California Office of the President on April 1, 2025 from IP address 128.48.53.147.
solution (PBS; Nacalai) at a concentration of 1 mg/mL, which was further
diluted in the culture medium in concentrations ranging from 10 ng/mL to
1 µg/mL, depending on the experiment. In the case that Prog (Sigma-
Aldrich) was used, stock was prepared by diluting it at a concentration
of 10 mM in DMSO. Cells were pretreated during 4 h with Prog at a
concentration of 10 µM, after which the medium was replaced with a
medium containing both Prog and LPS for stimulation. Medium changes
for control dishes were always performed in a similar manner as stimu-
lated ones.
After 24 h of stimulation, the medium was extracted for further analy-
sis through sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and the
culture dishes were washed two or three times with PBS supplemented with
glucose (5 mM) and MgCl2 (2 mM) before measurement.
Cell Measurements. Cells were measured on a multimodal microscope exten-
sively described in publications (9, 52). Quantitative phase images were
recorded with an interferometric setup based on off-axis digital holography
(53). A laser diode at 780 nm (Thorlabs) was split into object and reference
beams. The object beam illuminated the sample, and the diffracted wave
was collected with a Fluor 40× microscope objective (MO; Nikon; NA 0.75).
The two beams were then recombined, and the interference pattern was
recorded by a CCD camera (TXG20; Baumer) with an exposure time of typ-
ically 2 ms. Phase images were extracted from holograms through Fourier
ﬁltering and phase aberrations compensation (54, 55).
To acquire AF images, excitation was generated by a mercury lamp
(Nikon) attenuated with a ND12 ﬁlter and spectrally ﬁltered by a DAPI ﬁlter
cube (Semrock); cells were illuminated in an epiﬂuorescence conﬁguration.
The signal was acquired with the same MO as QPM and acquired with a sci-
entiﬁc complementary metal oxide semiconductor (sCMOS) detector (Rolera
Bolt; QImaging) with an exposure time of 100 ms.
The Raman excitation was performed with a continuous wave laser at
532 nm (Verdi V-6; Coherent), with a power density of 170 mW/µm2. Point
spectra were acquired while optically averaging the signal from a large
region of the cell in a hybrid imaging conﬁguration (35). The collected
backscattered light was separated from the excitation laser with a long-pass
dichroic mirror and sent into a 500-mm focal length Czerny–Turner spec-
trometer (Shamrock; Andor Technology). The light dispersed by the grating
(300 lp/mm) was then measured with a low-noise sCMOS camera (Orca-Flash
4.0; Hamamatsu Photonics) with an exposure time of 3 s.
ELISA. Collected medium was centrifuged at 1,500 × g during 5 min to iso-
late cell debris. Supernatants were then collected and stored at −85 ◦C
until TNF-α level quantiﬁcation was performed with ELISA in the follow-
ing weeks. Thawed supernatants were adequately diluted and measured
on immuno-plates (Thermo Scientiﬁc) according to the instructions of the
ELISA kit manufacturer (Mouse TNF-α MAX Standard; Biolegend), in the
7- to 500-pg/mL range. Absorbance at 450 nm was measured with a plate
reader (SpectraFluor; Tecan), and quantitative levels were estimated with
measurements of TNF-α standards through a logistic ﬁt.
Immunoﬂuorescence. Immediately after label-free measurements, cells were
ﬁxed with 2% paraformaldehyde for 10 min at RT and stored at 4 ◦C until
further processing. The next day, cells were permeabilized with 0.1% Triton
X-100 during 5 min at RT and incubated in Block Ace solution (DS Pharma
Biomed) with 0.1% Tween 20 for 2 h at RT to block nonspeciﬁc binding. Cells
were then incubated in anti-iNOS antibody conjugated with Alexa Fluor 488
(Santa Cruz Biotechnology) at 4 µg/mL during 1 h at RT. Cells were then
counterstained with Hoechst 33342 (Sigma) at 0.2 µg/mL during 2 min at
RT, washed three times with PBS, and stored at 4 ◦C until observation.
Fluorescent signals were observed on the same microscope as used for
AF measurements, with a DAPI ﬁlter set (gain 1; 10-ms exposure) and an
FITC ﬁlter set (gain 14; 300-ms exposure) for nuclear and iNOS signals,
respectively.
Data Processing. AF images were registered to provide the same ﬁeld of
view as QPM ones, by estimating the coefﬁcients of the linear transfor-
mation by maximizing the autocorrelation on a subset of images which
were then applied to the whole stack of images. Cell segmentation was
then performed with the CellProﬁler program (56), where pipelines speciﬁ-
cally designed for these label-free images were used. Segmentation results
were then manually checked for accuracy, and morphological indicators
were extracted from segmented images with the same program, where
parameters based on morphology (size and shape from the MeasureObject-
SizeShape module) and intensity-based parameters (intensity statistics and
texture within segmented cells, from the MeasureObjectIntensity, Mea-
sureObjectRadialDistribution, and MeasureTexture modules) were extracted
due to the quantitative nature of the measured images. A full list of the
morphological parameters is provided in Table S2. Parameters retrieved
from size, QPM, and AF measurements were then merged together (yielding
301 variables) for further processing.
Raman spectra were ﬁrst processed to prevent potential spectral shifts
when comparing data measured on different days, by interpolating spec-
tra on a grid calibrated by extracting the main peaks of a spectrum of pure
ethanol measured on the same day. Spectra were then baseline-corrected
by extracting values having a low probability of being larger than the signal
by taking the 0.2 quantile value in several windows within the spectrum.
The baseline was then estimated on all data points with cubic spline inter-
polation (57). The silent region (1,800–2,700 cm−1) was then removed from
spectra, which were then decomposed with PCA, and statistical analysis was
performed on the PC scores.
To enhance spectral features on showed spectra, curves were smoothed
with a locally weighted scatter-plot smoothing (LOESS) (58), which avoided
reducing peak sharpness. The smoothing was performed directly with the
loess function in R (59).
Statistical Models. Before analysis, morphological parameters were ﬁrst nor-
malized by their individual variance. Analysis was performed in the statisti-
cal program R through penalized logistic regression (60) with the glmnet
package. To ensure more stable predictions, parameters shrinkage was per-
formed with the lasso approach, where a L1 penalty term was introduced
to minimize the amount of used parameters to the most signiﬁcant ones
for classiﬁcation (SI Text). The selection of the penalty term λ was per-
formed manually by considering the binomial deviance through 10-fold
cross-validation, while ensuring reproducible performance between train-
ing and test datasets.
Statistical tests were performed as unpaired Student’s t tests (assuming
unequal variance). In case of multiple groups, signiﬁcance was ﬁrst assessed
with ANOVA, and individual differences were tested with post hoc Tukey’s
range tests. All computations were performed with standard functions in R.
Symbols used are: ***P < 0.001; **P < 0.01; *P < 0.05; and n.s. (not signiﬁ-
cant), P ≥0.05.
Data Availability. Representative raw data (DHM and AF images, Raman
spectra, etc.) and all the parameters extracted from the various measure-
ments shown in this article (including the values used as training data) are
available at dx.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1135372.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. This work was supported by the Japan Society for
the Promotion of Science through the World Premier International Research
Center Initiative Funding Program. Additional support has been provided
by the Nakatani Foundation for Advancement of Measuring Technologies
in Biomedical Engineering through a grant for research development and
the Uehara Memorial Foundation.
1. Heath JR, Ribas A, Mischel PS (2016) Single-cell analysis tools for drug discovery and
development. Nat Rev Drug Discov 15:204–216.
2. Spiller DG, Wood CD, Rand DA, White MRH (2010) Measurement of single-cell dynam-
ics. Nature 465:736–745.
3. Xu Y, Yuan J, Lipinski MM (2013) Live imaging and single-cell analysis reveal differen-
tial dynamics of autophagy and apoptosis. Autophagy 9:1418–1430.
4.
´Alvarez-Barrientos A, Arroyo J, Cant ´on R, Nombela C, S´anchez-P´erez M (2000)
Applications of ﬂow cytometry to clinical microbiology. Clin Microbiol Rev 13:167–
195.
5. Olsson A, et al. (2016) Single-cell analysis of mixed-lineage states leading to a binary
cell fate choice. Nature 537:698–702.
6. Lu Y, et al. (2015) Highly multiplexed proﬁling of single-cell effector functions reveals
deep functional heterogeneity in response to pathogenic ligands. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 112:E607–E615.
7. Junkin M, et al. (2016) High-content quantiﬁcation of single-cell immune dynamics.
Cell Rep 15:411–422.
8. Tay S, et al. (2010) Single-cell NF-κB dynamics reveal digital activation and analogue
information processing. Nature 466:267–271.
9. Pavillon N, Hobro AJ, Smith NI (2013) Cell optical density and molecular composi-
tion revealed by simultaneous multimodal label-free imaging. Biophys J 105:1123–
1132.
10. Rappaz B, et al. (2009) Noninvasive characterization of the ﬁssion yeast cell cycle by
monitoring dry mass with digital holographic microscopy. J Biomed Opt 14:034049.
11. Falck Miniotis M, Mukwaya A, Gj ¨orloff Wingren A (2014) Digital holographic
microscopy for non-invasive monitoring of cell cycle arrest in L929 cells. PLoS One
9:e106546.
12. Pavillon N, et al. (2012) Early cell death detection with digital holographic microscopy.
PLoS One 7:e30912.
E2684
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1711872115
Pavillon et al.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by UCOP University of California Office of the President on April 1, 2025 from IP address 128.48.53.147.
BIOPHYSICS AND
COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY
IMMUNOLOGY AND
INFLAMMATION
13. Ekpenyong AE, et al. (2013) Bacterial infection of macrophages induces decrease in
refractive index. J Biophotonics 6:393–397.
14. Lenz P, et al. (2013) Digital holographic microscopy quantiﬁes the degree of inﬂam-
mation in experimental colitis. Integr Biol 5:624–630.
15. K ¨uhn J, et al. (2013) Label-free cytotoxicity screening assay by digital holographic
microscopy. Assay Drug Dev Techn 11:101–107.
16. Yi F, Moon I, Javidi B (2016) Cell morphology-based classiﬁcation of red blood cells
using holographic imaging informatics. Biomed Opt Express 7:2385–2399.
17. Jo Y, et al. (2017) Holographic deep learning for rapid optical screening of anthrax
spores. Sci Adv 3:e1700606.
18. Chen CL, et al. (2016) Deep learning in label-free cell classiﬁcation. Sci Rep 6:
21471.
19. Guo B, et al. (2017) High-throughput, label-free, single-cell, microalgal lipid screen-
ing by machine-learning-equipped optoﬂuidic time-stretch quantitative phase mi-
croscopy. Cytometry 91:494–502.
20. Javidi B, Moon I, Yeom S, Carapezza E (2005) Three-dimensional imaging and recog-
nition of microorganism using single-exposure on-line (SEOL) digital holography. Opt
Express 13:4492–4506.
21. Moon I, Javidi B (2007) Three-dimensional identiﬁcation of stem cells by computa-
tional holographic imaging. J R Soc Interface 4:305–313.
22. Crow P, et al. (2005) The use of Raman spectroscopy to differentiate between differ-
ent prostatic adenocarcinoma cell lines. Br J Cancer 92:2166–2170.
23. Lloyd GR, et al. (2013) Discrimination between benign, primary and secondary
malignancies in lymph nodes from the head and neck utilising Raman spectroscopy
and multivariate analysis. Analyst 138:3900–3908.
24. Kong K, et al. (2013) Diagnosis of tumors during tissue-conserving surgery with inte-
grated autoﬂuorescence and Raman scattering microscopy. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
110:15189–15194.
25. Verrier S, Notingher I, Polak JM, Hench LL (2004) In situ monitoring of cell death using
Raman microspectroscopy. Biopolymers 74:157–162.
26. Okada M, et al. (2012) Label-free Raman observation of cytochrome c dynamics dur-
ing apoptosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109:28–32.
27. Hedegaard M, et al. (2011) Spectral unmixing and clustering algorithms for assess-
ment of single cells by Raman microscopic imaging. Theor Chem Acc 130:1249–
1260.
28. Goodacre R, et al. (1998) Rapid identiﬁcation of urinary tract infection bacteria using
hyperspectral whole-organism ﬁngerprinting and artiﬁcial neural networks. Microbi-
ology 144:1157–1170.
29. McReynolds N, Cooke FGM, Chen M, Powis SJ, Dholakia K (2017) Multimodal dis-
crimination of immune cells using a combination of Raman spectroscopy and digital
holographic microscopy. Sci Rep 7:43631.
30. Mosser DM, Edwards JP (2008) Exploring the full spectrum of macrophage activation.
Nat Rev Immunol 8:958–969.
31. Fujihara M, et al. (2003) Molecular mechanisms of macrophage activation and deac-
tivation by lipopolysaccharide: Roles of the receptor complex. Pharmacol Therapeut
100:171–194.
32. An H, et al. (2002) Involvement of ERK, p38 and NF–κB signal transduction in regula-
tion of TLR2, TLR4 and TLR9 gene expression induced by lipopolysaccharide in mouse
dendritic cells. Immunology 106:38–45.
33. Vogel DY, et al. (2014) Human macrophage polarization in vitro: Maturation and
activation methods compared. Immunobiology 219:695–703.
34. Gordonov S, et al. (2016) Time series modeling of live-cell shape dynamics for image-
based phenotypic proﬁling. Integr Biol 8:73–90.
35. Pavillon N, Smith NI (2015) Maximizing throughput in label-free microspectroscopy
with hybrid Raman imaging. J Biomed Opt 20:016007.
36. Beleites C, Neugebauer U, Bocklitz T, Krafft C, Popp J (2013) Sample size planning for
classiﬁcation models. Anal Chim Acta 760:25–33.
37. MacMicking J, Xie QW, Nathan C (1997) Nitric oxide and macrophage function. Annu
Rev Immunol 15:323–350.
38. Kable EP, Kiemer AK (2005) Non-invasive live-cell measurement of changes in
macrophage NAD(P)H by two-photon microscopy. Immunol Lett 96:33–38.
39. Ellis DI, Cowcher DP, Ashton L, O’Hagan S, Goodacre R (2013) Illuminating disease
and enlightening biomedicine: Raman spectroscopy as a diagnostic tool. Analyst
138:3871–3884.
40. Takai Y, Masuko T, Takeuchi H (1997) Lipid structure of cytotoxic granules in living
human killer T lymphocytes studied by Raman microspectroscopy. Biochim Biophys
Acta 1335:199–208.
41. Hobro AJ, Standley DM, Ahmad S, Smith NI (2013) Deconstructing RNA: Optical mea-
surement of composition and structure. Phys Chem Chem Phys 15:13199–13208.
42. Nomura F, et al. (2000) Cutting edge: Endotoxin tolerance in mouse peritoneal
macrophages correlates with down-regulation of surface toll-like receptor 4 expres-
sion. J Immunol 164:3476–3479.
43. Anderson KV (2000) Toll signaling pathways in the innate immune response. Curr
Opin Immunol 12:13–19.
44. Jacobs AT, Ignarro LJ (2001) LPS-induced expression of IFN-β mediates the timing of
iNOS induction in RAW 264.7 macrophages. J Biol Chem 276:47950–47957.
45. Xiao L, et al. (2012) Lipopolysaccharide-induced expression of microsomal prostaglan-
din E synthase-1 mediates late-phase PGE2 production in bone marrow derived
macrophages. PLoS One 7:e50244.
46. Chao TC, Van Alten PJ, Greager JA, Walter RJ (1995) Steroid sex hormones regulate
the release of tumor necrosis factor by macrophages. Cell Immunol 160:43–49.
47. Miller L, Hunt JS (1996) Sex steroid hormones and macrophage function. Life Sci 59:
1–14.
48. Miller L, Hunt JS (1998) Regulation of TNF-α production in activated mouse
macrophages by progesterone. J Immunol 160:5098–5104.
49. Su L, et al. (2009) Progesterone inhibits Toll-like receptor 4-mediated innate immune
response in macrophages by suppressing NF-κB activation and enhancing SOCS1
expression. Immunol Lett 125:151–155.
50. Dagvadorj J, et al. (2015) Lipopolysaccharide induces alveolar macrophage necrosis
via CD14 and the P2X7 receptor leading to interleukin-1α release. Immunity 42:640–
653.
51. Menzies FM, Henriquez FL, Alexander J, Roberts CW (2011) Selective inhibition and
augmentation of alternative macrophage activation by progesterone. Immunology
134:281–291.
52. Pavillon N, Smith NI (2015) Implementation of simultaneous quantitative phase with
Raman imaging. EPJ Tech Instr 2:1–11.
53. Marquet P, et al. (2005) Digital holographic microscopy: A noninvasive contrast imag-
ing technique allowing quantitative visualization of living cells with subwavelength
axial accuracy. Opt Lett 30:468–470.
54. Cuche E, Marquet P, Depeursinge C (1999) Simultaneous amplitude–contrast and
quantitative phase–contrast microscopy by numerical reconstruction of Fresnel off–
axis holograms. Appl Opt 38:6994–7001.
55. Colomb T, et al. (2006) Total aberrations compensation in digital holographic
microscopy with a reference conjugated hologram. Opt Express 14:4300–4306.
56. Carpenter AE, et al. (2006) Cellproﬁler: Image analysis software for identifying and
quantifying cell phenotypes. Genome Biol 7:R100.
57. Pavillon N, Bando K, Fujita K, Smith NI (2013) Feature-based recognition of surface-
enhanced Raman spectra for biological targets. J Biophotonics 6:587–597.
58. Cleveland WS (1979) Robust locally weighted regression and smoothing scatterplots.
J Am Stat Assoc 74:829–836.
59. R Core Team (2016) R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing (R
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna).
60. Hastie T, Tibshirani R, Jerome F (2008) The Elements of Statistical Learning, Springer
Series in Statistics (Springer, Berlin), 2nd Ed.
Pavillon et al.
PNAS
|
vol. 115
|
no. 12
|
E2685
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by UCOP University of California Office of the President on April 1, 2025 from IP address 128.48.53.147.
