Extracting spatio-temporal patterns in animal
trajectories: an ecological application of sequence
analysis methods
Johannes De Groeve1,2, Nico Van de Weghe1, Nathan Ranc2,3, Tijs Neutens1, Lino Ometto4,
Omar Rota-Stabelli4 and Francesca Cagnacci2
1Department of Geography, Ghent University, Krijgslaan 281, 9000 Gent, Belgium; 2Department of Biodiversity and Molecular
Ecology, Research and Innovation Centre, Fondazione Edmund Mach, Via E. Mach 1, 38010 San Michele all’ Adige, Trentino,
Italy; 3Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 26 Oxford Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA;
and 4Department of Sustainable Agro-Ecosystems and Bioresources, Research and Innovation Centre, Fondazione Edmund
Mach, Via E. Mach 1, 38010 San Michele all’ Adige, Trentino, Italy
Summary
1. Digital tracking technologies have considerably increased the amount and quality of animal trajectories,
enabling the study of habitat use and habitat selection at a ﬁne spatial and temporal scale. However, current
approaches do not yet explicitly account for a key aspect of habitat use, namely the sequential variation in the
use of diﬀerent habitat features.
2. To overcome this limitation, we propose a tree-based approach that makes use of sequence analysis methods,
derived from molecular biology, to explore and identify ecologically relevant sequential patterns in habitat use
by animals. We applied this approach to ecological data consisting of simulated and real trajectories from a roe
deer population (Capreolus capreolus), expressed as ordered sequences of habitat use.
3. We show that our approach eﬀectively captured spatio-temporal patterns of sequential habitat use by roe
deer. In our case study, individual sequences were clustered according to the sequential use of the elevation gradi-
ent (ﬁrst order) and of open/closed habitats (second order). We provided evidence for several behavioural pro-
cesses, such as migration and daily alternating habitat use. Some unexpected patterns, such as homogeneous
sequences of use of open habitat, could also be identiﬁed.
4. Our ﬁndings advocate the importance of dealing with the sequential nature of movement data. Approaches
based on sequence analysis methods are particularly useful and eﬀective since they allow exploring temporal pat-
terns of habitat use in a synthetic and visually captive manner. The proposed approach represents a useful and
eﬀective way to classify individual movement behaviour across populations and species. Ultimately, this method
can be applied to explore the temporal scale of ecological processes based on movement.
Key-words: autocorrelation, distance, exploratory analysis, habitat use, Hamming, roe deer, spa-
tio-temporal sequences, trees
Introduction
Recent advances in digital tracking technology and increased
availability of high-resolution environmental data by remote
sensing have facilitated the collection of spatio-temporal series
of animal-borne data (Cagnacci et al. 2010). Application of
satellite navigation technology (e.g. Global Positioning Sys-
tem, GPS) to individual animals allows recording temporal
sequences of animal locations at an unprecedented spatio-tem-
poral resolution. Moreover, by projecting these locations onto
spatial layers, including satellite images, it is possible to obtain
robust and standardized information about the habitat of
these animals (Urbano et al. 2010).
At present, an array of both exploratory and inferential
methods is available to the analyst to investigate the relation
between animal movement and the use of habitat. Explora-
tory methods apply multivariate analysis techniques (e.g. gen-
eral niche-environment system factor analysis, GNESFA, the
K-select analysis, (canonical) outlying mean index analysis;
see R-package AdehabitatHS of Calenge (2006) for an over-
view) to identify relevant variables describing the habitat (or
the realized niche) of a population. Similarly, decision tree
learning methods, such as random forest and CART mod-
elling, are data mining techniques that present decision rules
for classifying a set of data based on associated explanatory
variables (see R-package rpart of Therneau, Atkinson & Rip-
ley (2014)). Conversely, inferential methods mainly consist of
a variety of regression models testing the disproportion
between used and available habitat units (i.e. habitat selec-
*Correspondence author. E-mail: degroevejohannes@gmail.com
© 2015 The Authors. Methods in Ecology and Evolution © 2015 British Ecological Society
Methods in Ecology and Evolution 2016, 7, 369–379
doi: 10.1111/2041-210X.12453
tion; Johnson 1980), such as resource selection functions,
RSF (Boyce et al. 2002) and step selection functions, SSF
(Fortin et al. 2005). In essence, exploratory methods oﬀer a
description of animals’ habitat, whereas inferential methods
allow to test speciﬁc hypotheses (Calenge & Basille 2008). In
this sense, the ﬁrst can be used to select explanatory variables
that are relevant for the application of the latter (e.g. Calenge
2006; Wittemyer et al. 2008; Dray, Royer-Carenzi & Calenge
2010).
Despite the proliferation of exploratory methods, current
approaches rarely evaluate the sequential use of habitats by
animals, that is the sequence of locations (trajectory) vs. the
underlying ordered pattern of habitat use. In movement ecol-
ogy, temporal patterns have been addressed, for example, by
exploration of temporal autocorrelation of movement parame-
ters (Wittemyer et al. 2008; Dray, Royer-Carenzi & Calenge
2010). We wish to draw attention on the meaningfulness of
temporal patterns when describing habitat choices. For exam-
ple, the same proportion of habitat use in a certain time inter-
val may correspond to very diﬀerent sequential patterns. An
animal may continuously use a single habitat type, then switch
to another, or, in contrast, alternate the use of both. Such spa-
tio-temporal patterns may correspond to alternative space-use
tactics, and ﬁnd a deep ecological signiﬁcance. Currently,
insights in the spatial patterns of use of multiple habitat-related
variables are easy to obtain, for example using suitability maps
(e.g. Calenge 2006); however, very few methods provide
insights into spatio-temporal patterns combined. An interest-
ing publication in that direction comes from Benhamou &
Riotte-Lambert (2012) presenting a framework using move-
ment-based kernel density estimation (utilization distribution)
and computation of residence time combined to explore the
areas of intensive use. Here, we are interested into methods to
visually explore the sequential and thus temporal structure of
habitat use.
In other research areas, such as geo-visual analytics, impor-
tant progress has been made in terms of visually exploring
sequential data at variable spatio-temporal scales (Andrienko,
Andrienko & Heurich 2011). Buchin, Dodge & Speckmann
(2012), for example, developed a geometric algorithm for tra-
jectory clustering that takes into account environmental con-
text parameters such as temperature and habitat type. In
sociology, on the other hand, the link between sequential
order of human behaviour and space use has been investi-
gated using sequence analysis methods (SAMs) (Abbott
1995). This technique is principally used in the ﬁeld of bioin-
formatics to evaluate the degree of similarity among DNA or
protein sequences, but has also been applied successfully in
transportation science (Wilson 2008), tourism research (Sho-
val & Isaacson 2007) and indoor navigation (Delafontaine
et al. 2012).
Sequence analysis methods to our knowledge has never been
applied to explore spatio-temporal patterns in sequential habi-
tat use by animals. The essence of this approach is the possibil-
ity to ‘extract’ ordered sequences of habitat classes occupied
along trajectories by means of clusters, which can be
conveniently visualized in trees and validated by measures of
statistical reliability. Moreover, SAM allows to deal with two
common issues of GPS-based location data sets: missing data
points (i.e. acquisition failures by GPS sensors; Frair et al.
2010) and spatial correlation (Dray, Royer-Carenzi & Calenge
2010).
In this study, we aimed to evaluate the applicability of
SAM to movement ecology data for exploratory purposes by
analysing both simulated trajectories and time-stamped loca-
tions of individually tracked roe deer (Capreolus capreolus)
from a partially migratory alpine population. The analysis
consisted of several steps (Fig. 1). We ﬁrst produced a classiﬁ-
cation tree based on bimonthly sequences of habitat use by
individual roe deer. We used this ﬁrst exploratory classiﬁca-
tion to hypothesize potential patterns of sequential habitat
use. Then, we produced simulated trajectories with those pat-
terns, at diﬀerent proportion of habitat availability, and clas-
siﬁed them in trees. We then re-added the real trajectories to
simulation trees, while accounting for their relative propor-
tion of habitat availability. Finally, we evaluated the biologi-
cal relevance of such classiﬁcation on the basis of ecological
predictions. This way, we explored spatio-temporal patterns
of real trajectories and evaluated them in a simulated experi-
mental setting.
Materials and methods
STUDY AREA AND REAL TRAJECTORIES
The studied animal population consisted of 26 European roe deer
equipped with a GPS collar (GPS-Plus D, Vectronic Aerospace
GmbH), of which 16 were females and 10 males. Six of them were col-
lared as fawns (i.e. less than 1 year old; 2 females and 4 males), one as
yearling (i.e. one female between 1 and 2 year old), while all others
were collared as adults. Figure 2 pictures the cumulative sum of the
90% ﬁxed-kernel home ranges (KDE) with reference smoothing
parameter (href; Worton 1995) of individual roe deer using Home
Range Extension (Rodgers & Carr 1998). This area extends across the
Monte Bondone–Monte Stivo range, west of Trento and Adige valley
and east of Valle dei Laghi, in north-east Italy (46°40N, 11°70E).
Elevation ranges between 200 and 2300 m above sea level (m a.s.l.).
Along this altitudinal gradient, climate is extremely varied, ranging
from semi-Mediterranean and temperate (<1000 m a.s.l. deﬁned as
‘low elevation’) to semi-alpine and alpine (>1000 m a.s.l. deﬁned as
‘high elevation’) conditions. The study area is mainly covered by
broad-leaved, coniferous and mixed forest (deﬁned as ‘closed habitat’,
representing 50% and 75% of high and low elevations, respectively),
alternated by pastures (deﬁned as ‘open habitat’, representing 50%
and 25% of high and low elevations, respectively). Relevantly, the
high-elevation range is mainly constituted by protected land,
whereas the low elevation is not and is characterized by more anthro-
pic land use.
The sampling period spanned from 2005 to 2008, during which GPS
collars yielded a total of 54 845 time-stamped locations. The interval
and duration of sampling were diﬀerent among individuals, depending
on date of capture and battery exhaustion. Locations were acquired at
a pre-determined temporal interval Dt of 4 h at ﬁxed time stamps (0, 4,
8, 12, 16 and 20 h) except for cold winter months (January and Febru-
ary), when Dt was 6 h (0, 6, 12 and 18 h) in order to save battery. We
linked GPS locations to two geographical parameters retrieved from
© 2015 The Authors. Methods in Ecology and Evolution © 2015 British Ecological Society, Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 7, 369–379
370
J. De Groeve et al.
 2041210x, 2016, 3, Downloaded from https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/2041-210X.12453, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
remote sensing sources: habitat openness [EEA-Corine Landcover
(CLC) 2006 IV, European Environment Agency, EEA (2010), resolu-
tion = 100 m] and elevation [NASA-ASTER GDEM, Ministry of
Economy, Trade, and Industry of Japan, METI, National Aeronautics
and
Space
Administration
of
the
United
States,
NASA
(2012) = 30 m]. We combined and reclassiﬁed environmental parame-
ters into four classes: high closed (HC), high open (HO), low closed
(LC), low open (LO) (Table 1 and Fig. 2). In this application, we used
four classes to reduce the complexity of data analysis for demonstra-
tion. On the one side, the classes correspond to well-deﬁned vegetation
successional types in the alpine habitat of this population (Cagnacci
et al. 2011); on the other side, they are meaningful for roe deer habitat
use traits, since they are known to prefer ecotonal habitats and forest
edges (Tufto, Andersen & Linnell 1996).
Then, we recoded sequences of locations into sequences of the envi-
ronmental classes above, adding asterisks to account for missing loca-
tions due to acquisition failure. More precisely, the input sequences for
SAM describe the habitat use by individual animals at regular time
stamps (0, 4, 8, 12, 16 and 20 h) over a period of 2 months. While
SAM is able to deal with missing data, if they are too frequent, they can
over-fragment the sequence and thus bias the similarity measurement.
To avoid a bias in the downstream analyses, we therefore excluded
bimonthly sequences with more than 40% of missing data. After
removal, the input ﬁle consisted of a total of 111 sequences (min 21,
max 24 per bimonthly period), which were reclassiﬁed as belonging to
summer (May–October) or winter (November–April) season, based on
snowfalls and typical alpine climate (Ramanzin, Sturaro & Zanon
2007; Cagnacci et al. 2011). Only seven sequences could be retained for
Fig. 1. Flowchart of the complete process to explore spatio-temporal habitat use patterns of real trajectories by sequence similarity analysis. In
essence, based on simple classiﬁcation trees of real trajectories (a), we simulated trajectories with a priori deﬁned patterns of sequential habitat use
(b), which in turn were used to produce classiﬁcation trees accounting for spatial correlation, at diﬀerent proportion of habitat availability (b/c). We
then introduced the real trajectories (c), accounting for the relative proportion of habitat availability, and assessed their classiﬁcation into tree clus-
ters resulting from the simulation exercise (c/d).
© 2015 The Authors. Methods in Ecology and Evolution © 2015 British Ecological Society, Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 7, 369–379
Spatio-temporal patterns in roe deer habitat use
371
 2041210x, 2016, 3, Downloaded from https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/2041-210X.12453, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
January–February; therefore, we excluded the whole period from fur-
ther analysis. Finally, sequences were associated with sex, age (fawn,
yearling or adult) and migration occurrence (migrant, non-migrant, no
data), of each individual. We obtained a ﬁrst visualization of the habi-
tat use patterns represented in our sample by creating a simple classiﬁ-
cation tree of the 111 sequences (Fig. 1a). This classiﬁcation tree was
based on Hamming distance (Gabadinho et al. 2011; see below for
more details), without accounting for spatial correlation, nor habitat
availability. Thus, this ﬁrst classiﬁcation tree does not allow to objec-
tively classify the sequential use of habitat types, but can be used to
build hypotheses for expected models of habitat use.
SIMULATION ARENAS AND SIMULATED TRAJECTORIES
We simulated nine squared gridded arenas, each composed of 10 000
squared cells of 100 9 100 m mirroring the availability of environmen-
tal classes present in the real settings (Fig. 1b, Appendix S1, Supporting
Information). Since elevation classes are highly clustered in our study
area (see Fig. 2), we split each arena into two equal parts, correspond-
ing to high and low elevations. We obtained the ﬁnal four categories by
randomly assigning all cells to either open or closed habitats, with vary-
ing proportions from 10 to 90% in each arena. Thus, simulated land-
scapes covered all possible habitat prevalence, which may occur within
individual home ranges in this speciﬁc study area.
Within each arena, we generated simulated sequential habitat use
using a simple spatially explicit stochastic movement model (Fig. 1b,
grey box ‘MM’; Appendix S2). For the simulated trajectories, we chose
4 diﬀerent patterns of habitat selection, based on preliminary observa-
tions on the classiﬁcation tree of real trajectories (Fig. 1a), and previous
knowledge on roe deer ecology. We thus distinguished homogeneous
use of closed or open habitats, and random and alternating use (i.e.
day–night patterns) of open and closed habitats. The random pattern
represented the ‘control’ in our simulated experimental settings. The
homogeneous closed and the alternation between closed and open were
the expected patterns according to roe deer ecology and speciﬁcally the
known preference for forest and ecotonal habitats (Tufto, Andersen &
Linnell 1996). Homogeneous open represented the alternative hypothe-
sis. We simulated 100 trajectory replicates for each of the nine arenas
and four behaviours of habitat selection (total of 3600 sequences,
Fig. 1b, grey box ‘simulated sequences’). Because sequential use of ele-
vation was strongly dependent on the release location of the simulated
agents, each of the 100th set of simulations had the same seed random
locations across arenas and behaviours (i.e. trajectories had the same
seed in groups of 36). We then trimmed the simulated trajectories to
match the length of the real bimonthly roe deer trajectories, that is 366
steps. Finally, simulated sequences of habitat use were extracted from
these calibrated trajectories.
GENERAL PROCEDURE OF SEQUENCE SIMILARITY
ANALYSIS FOR CALCULATION OF DISSIMILARITY TREES
Sequence analysis methods are based on sequence similarity measures
that are used to identify groups of sequences showing similar beha-
viour. The input of such analysis always relies on a dissimilarity
matrix, which provides the dissimilarity, or ‘distance’ among all possi-
ble pairs of sequences. Among the available algorithms, we chose
Hamming distance (HD) to ascertain the dissimilarity matrix, as it is
considered the most suitable for sequences with a temporal dimension.
HD relies solely on two operations: identity and substitution, and in
fact, it computes the minimum number of substitutions to equate a
number of sequences of equal length (Gabadinho et al. 2011). In a
more optimized HD, also weights can be assigned to substitutions;
that is, HD computation can be based on a substitution weight matrix.
Figure 3 gives a conceptual example of two alternative HD of the
character strings ‘Kapreolo’ and ‘Capriolo’, respectively, the word for
roe deer in Esperanto and Italian. Both distinguish six identities and
two substitutions, but diﬀer from each other in weights assigned to
substitutions. The substitution between the letters K and C gets a
lower weight (i.e. probability) in ‘a’ (substitution score = 04, Fig. 3a)
than in ‘b’ (substitution score = 1, Fig. 3b), since the former HD
takes into account the phonetic similarity. Consequently, the total dis-
similarity in ‘a’ will be lower than in ‘b’.
In our case, the dissimilarity matrix computed by the HD algorithm
was based on substitution weights for all combinations of habitat classes,
and constrained to their availability and distribution, which together
determine the patterns of spatial correlation. Therefore, we derived the
substitution weights from spatial correlation of habitat classes in the simu-
lated arenas (Fig. 1b, grey box ‘substitution weight matrix’, see Appen-
dix S3 for computation and simulations of the substitution weights).
The successive step in data analysis is using the HD dissimilarity
matrix to calculate a dissimilarity tree. Here, we used Ward’s method
Fig. 2. The study area, indicated by the darker irregular shaped poly-
gons, was computed as the cumulative sum of home ranges of 26 indi-
vidually marked roe deer (kernel density estimator, 90% polygons).
For codes of habitat classes, see Table 1. N: urban areas.
Table 1. Reclassiﬁcation of the environmental parameters elevation
and habitat openness resulting in combined classes (coded as HC, HO,
LC and LO)
Elevation
Habitat openness
Habitat use classes
Low (<1000 m)
Closed*
LC
Low
Open†
LO
High (>1000 m)
Closed
HC
High
Open
HO
*Forest: Corine Landcover classes 311, 312, 313, 323, 324.
†No Forest: All other Corine Landcover classes, except inland water.
© 2015 The Authors. Methods in Ecology and Evolution © 2015 British Ecological Society, Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 7, 369–379
372
J. De Groeve et al.
 2041210x, 2016, 3, Downloaded from https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/2041-210X.12453, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
(Fig. 1b/c, HCW), the most common hierarchical agglomerative clus-
ter procedure (Gabadinho et al. 2011). The resulting trees are a repre-
sentation of the dissimilarity among the habitat use sequences of
animals. The distance, or ‘branch length’, between leaves (which stay
for individuals) and nodes (which stay for groups of individuals) can be
used as a proxy for the dissimilarity between the portions of the tree:
the longer the distance, the higher the dissimilarity.
The following step is the identiﬁcation of ‘clusters’, or portions of the
tree indicating association between sequences. This is the most impor-
tant step to use trees for exploratory purposes and the subsequent inter-
pretation of results. We determined the number of clusters present in a
tree by a cut-oﬀdistance, based on a repeatable bootstrapping proce-
dure (Fig. 1b/c, BJ). For this application, we performed 1000 iterations
and calculated the Jaccard bootstrapping index (i.e. bootmean; Hennig
2007) for a cut-oﬀdistance that separated from two to twenty clusters.
This index compares the similarities of the original clusters to the most
similar clusters in bootstrapped data sets. The cut-oﬀdistance was
determined as the maximum number of clusters where the median
bootmean is higher than 09, a value corresponding to highly stable
clusters. This threshold is conservative in a sense that normally values
above 075 correspond to robust classiﬁcation.
DETERMINING CLASSIFICATION TREES OF SIMULATED
TRAJECTORIES
Using this procedure, we computed a dissimilarity tree and identiﬁed
clusters for each simulated landscape by using the 400 simulated
sequences (100 replicates 9 4 patterns of sequential habitat use,
Fig. 1c). To account for spatial correlation of the four habitat classes,
we recomputed the substitution matrix for each landscape. In fact,
although all grid cells were assigned to habitat classes (open/closed) at
random, this still corresponded to diﬀerent spatial correlation struc-
tures across arenas, an eﬀect of the diﬀerent proportion of classes.
Then, we investigated the sequence composition of individual clusters
distinguished by the classiﬁcation trees to assess the liability of the
method to correctly group sequences of diﬀerent sequential behaviours.
This also allowed us to identify the name of each cluster.
DETERMINING SPATIO-TEMPORAL PATTERNS OF REAL
TRAJECTORIES
In the next step, we introduced the real trajectories into one of the clas-
siﬁcation trees (Fig. 1c), according to the relative proportion of habitat
availability as follows. For each real bimonthly sequence, we measured
the availability of open/closed habitat within the corresponding
bimonthly home range. We then associated them to the simulated tra-
jectories referring to the arena with the same habitat proportion. For
example, if an individual bimonthly home range showed an open habi-
tat availability between 45 and 55%, the corresponding sequences were
associated with the simulated sequences originated from the 50%
arena. Then, each tree was recalculated for the combined set of
sequences (simulated and corresponding real sequences). Using this
approach, simulation sequences could be used as a guide for classiﬁca-
tion of real sequences to their most similar sequential behavioural
group (Fig. 1c,d).
EXPECTED SPATIO-TEMPORAL PATTERNS OF REAL
TRAJECTORIES
Based on previous knowledge on roe deer ecology, and the individual
descriptive variables, we formulated predictions of tree clustering. This
was the core of our study, to assess the meaningfulness of SAM for
exploration of spatio-temporal sequences of ecological data. In roe deer
populations of northern and alpine environments, some individuals
reach higher elevations in summer, when habitat suitability increases,
and return at lower elevation in rigid winter conditions. Other individu-
als, instead, occupy the same low-elevation range all year round (Ra-
manzin, Sturaro & Zanon 2007; Cagnacci et al. 2011). This
phenomenon is known as partial migration. On these premises, we
expected individuals to classify into two main clusters according to the
use of elevation: animals with a constant use of the same elevation
range (winter and summer sequences) and animals with a seasonal shift
in elevation range associated with migration (winter sequences sepa-
rated from summer sequences) (P1a). Roe deer reproductive season is
concentrated in summer, when both males and females exploit the best
environmental conditions to meet the high energetic demand of mating
and giving birth (Hewison, Vincent & Reby 1998). If migration is
linked to habitat quality, we expect both sexes to show similar patterns
of migration and thus of elevation range use (P1b, but see Ramanzin,
Sturaro & Zanon 2007). Likewise, since fawns are not yet engaged in
reproduction, we may expect a lower rate of migrating individuals
(P1c). Alternatively, they may follow the mother in the migrating
movements. Predictions on sequential use of open and closed habitats
are less straightforward. Roe deer are known to prefer habitats provid-
ing cover and protection, especially intermediate stages of forest succes-
sion and ecotonal habitats (e.g. Tufto, Andersen & Linnell 1996).
Therefore, we predict that animals would show a sequential use of habi-
tats diﬀerent from random (P2a). In particular, we predict a separation
between animals using only closed habitat and those showing a com-
bined use of closed and open habitats (P2b). When animals use both
habitats, we expect open habitats to be used mainly during night, due
to the anti-disturbance and anti-predatory behaviour of roe deer, trans-
lating in an alternating sequential use of open and closed (P2c) (Sa€ıd &
Servanty 2005). For similar reasons, a constant use of open habitat is
instead less likely (P2d).
Classiﬁcation trees of simulated trajectories
The application of HD algorithm to simulated bimonthly
sequences generated 9 trees, each corresponding to landscapes
with diﬀerent habitat availabilities (i.e. T10–T90; see Fig. 1c
and Appendix S4 for all trees). In all trees, the topological rela-
tionships between tree branches indicated two main orders of
classiﬁcation: ﬁrst-order clusters, splitting the sequences into
two groups according to the preferential use of diﬀerent eleva-
tions (C1 and C2; e.g. Fig. 1c), and several second-order clus-
ters separating animals with diﬀerent sequential use of open
and closed habitats (C, R, A, O, U; see text below, Fig. 1c and
Appendix S4: second-order clusters are distinguished by
coloured branches).
K
A
P
R
E O
L
O
C
A
P
R
I
O
L
O
a
0·4
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1·4
b
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
2
Fig. 3. Two alternative computations of the Hamming distance, based
on substitution weights given to each operation performed to equate
the sequences (reported under each character). Identities are in italic
and substitutions bolt.
© 2015 The Authors. Methods in Ecology and Evolution © 2015 British Ecological Society, Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 7, 369–379
Spatio-temporal patterns in roe deer habitat use
373
 2041210x, 2016, 3, Downloaded from https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/2041-210X.12453, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
At ﬁrst order, all trees showed a signiﬁcant separation (Jac-
card bootstrapping index BJ > 095) between high- and low-
elevation trajectories, thus deﬁning a ‘high-elevation’ cluster
(C1) and a ‘low-elevation’ cluster (C2). At second order, our
deﬁned bootstrap threshold (i.e. BJ,median > 09) identiﬁed 6–8
main clusters (T10–T30 and T70–T90 = 6 clusters, with 40–80
sequences in each cluster; T40–T60 = 8 clusters, with about 40
sequences in each) and 3–7 small clusters (with less than 10
sequences each). Separation of the main second-order clusters
was signiﬁcant (most clusters BJ > 095), whereas for smaller
clusters, it was not (most clusters BJ < 075). For both high
and low elevations, the main second-order clusters corre-
sponded to diﬀerent patterns of sequential open/closed habitat
use. The classiﬁcation of sequences in such clusters was highly
dependent on habitat availability in arenas. For trees deriving
from arenas with similar open/closed habitat proportion (40–
60%: T40, T50, T60, Fig. 1c, Figs S4.4–S4.6 in Appendix S4),
we distinguished all four simulated sequential behaviours:
homogeneous closed (C; brown and dark blue branches), ran-
dom (R; red and cyan branches), alternating (A; orange and
blue branches) and homogeneous open (O; yellow and light
blue branches). In this case, 99% of sequences in each cluster
was of the same sequential behaviour. For example, all
sequences in the blue cluster of Fig. 1c are homogeneous
closed. Conversely, for landscapes where habitats were dispro-
portionally available (open<30% or open>70%: T10, T20, T30
and T70, T80, T90, Fig. S4.1–S4.3, S4.7–S4.9 in Appendix S4),
random sequences clustered with homogeneous sequences of
the dominant habitat (C with R: brown and dark blue
branches; O with R: light blue and yellow branches). The ran-
dom sequential use of habitat according to availability (i.e. the
control case) was therefore eﬀectively represented by a sepa-
rated random cluster only when sequences were not trivial (e.g.
T10 and T90 obviously led to homogeneous sequences ‘at
random’).
Finally, small clusters corresponded to trajectories indicat-
ing a mixed use of high and low elevations, for a speciﬁc pat-
tern of sequential use of open and closed habitats (e.g. mixed-
alternating). Alternatively, small clusters were undeﬁned (U)
due to a too small number of sequences (<5 sequences) and can
be considered as outliers. Both mixed and undeﬁned clusters
were coloured grey in trees (Fig. 1c, Appendix S4).
Spatio-temporal patterns of real trajectories and
discussion of the study case
SEQUENTIAL HABITAT USE PATTERNS
We used the trees based on mixed simulated and real trajecto-
ries to assess the classiﬁcation of real trajectories according to
sequential habitat use. To visualize how real trajectories were
classiﬁed, we extracted (i.e. pruning) the real sequences from
nine diﬀerent trees (Figs 1d and 4, see also Appendix S5 for a
diﬀerent visualization).
Fig. 4. Roe deer bimonthly sequences of habitat use classes (right portion of the nine panels; daily scale reported bottom right), and resulting dissim-
ilarity trees, based on the Hamming distance algorithm (left portion of the panels). The real sequences were extracted (pruned) from their corre-
sponding simulated tree from which sequences were derived from a trajectory running over nine diﬀerent arenas with varying habitat proportions
(10–90%). Tree ‘leaves’ represent a real sequence, while ‘nodes’ indicate their clustering. Branch lengths (distance between leaves, and ﬁrst common
node: bottom left for the scale) indicate the dissimilarity between individual sequences. The split into two main clusters deﬁne ﬁrst-order clusters sep-
aration, based on use of elevation classes (high, C1; low, C2). Second-order clusters are based on the use of open/closed habitats and distinguish
homogeneous closed (C, brown and dark blue branches), random (R, red and cyan branches), alternating (A, orange and blue branches) and homo-
geneous open (O, yellow and light blue branches). Grey branches (U) are sequences with undeﬁned classiﬁcation or clusters with mixed sequences of
high and low. The id gives the animal code and season (summer, S; winter, W). Variables season, age, sex and migration are represented as colour-
coded bars between trees and sequences (see legend for meaning of the colours).
© 2015 The Authors. Methods in Ecology and Evolution © 2015 British Ecological Society, Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 7, 369–379
374
J. De Groeve et al.
 2041210x, 2016, 3, Downloaded from https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/2041-210X.12453, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
The ﬁrst-order clusters C1 and C2 distinguish very well high-
from low-elevation sequences (Fig. 4, Appendix S5 right vs.
left panels).
More interesting is the classiﬁcation of sequences in diﬀer-
ent sequential patterns of open/closed habitat use (second
order). Within our roe deer population, we found evidence
of the four diﬀerent patterns of open/closed sequential use
that have been addressed in our simulations. Speciﬁcally, 98
sequences out of 111 were classiﬁed according to those pat-
terns
(915%).
Moreover,
some
interesting
diﬀerences
emerged in sequential use of open/closed habitats for diﬀer-
ent elevations (Fig. 4, Appendix S5). At high elevation, half
of the sequences have an alternating (C1A: 32%, 18
sequences) or homogeneous closed pattern (C1C: 25%, 14
sequences), whereas only 11% of the sequences are random
(C1R: 6 sequences). At low elevation, 63% of the sequences
are homogeneous closed (C2C: 41%, 22 sequences) or ran-
dom (C1R: 22%, 12 sequences), and conversely alternating
sequences are uncommon (C1A: 13%, 7 sequences). Surpris-
ingly, both at high and low elevations, there are also homo-
geneous open sequences (C1O: 18%, 10 sequences; C2O:
14%, 8 sequences). At the study area scale, diﬀerent sequen-
tial patterns of open/closed habitat use according to eleva-
tion are possibly linked to those habitats availability in the
study area (Fig. 2: open more available at high elevation).
Indeed, individual habitat use sequences are obviously
related to the availability of habitat classes within the home
range (Fig. 4), in particular sequences classiﬁed as homoge-
neous sequences (C and O) derived from home ranges with a
large proportion of one speciﬁc habitat type (Fig. 4.1–4.3,
<30% open; Fig. 4.7–4.9, >70% open). Instead, heteroge-
neous sequences showed an alternating or random pattern
(A and R) and derived from home ranges where both habi-
tat types were available (Fig. 4.4–4.6, >40% open and <60%
open). Interestingly, though, both homogeneous and hetero-
geneous trajectories lay next to each other in the study area
(Fig. 5). Also, several sequences with the same home range
availability were assigned to diﬀerent sequential patterns.
For example, 776_W was classiﬁed in C2A and 787_S in
C2C, when they both have 30% open in home ranges
(Fig. 4.3). Or, 771_S was classiﬁed in C1C and 789_S in
C1R, when they both have 40% open in home ranges
(Fig. 4.4).
Finally, sequences switching between high and low were
classiﬁed in the mixed-alternating cluster (only one sequence)
or in the undeﬁned clusters (i.e. as an outlier) (Fig. 4, C1U:
14%, 8 sequences; C2U: 9%, 5 sequences). Notably, C1U
mainly consists of sequences changing from high to low ele-
vation (e.g. Fig. 4.4, 797_W; Fig. 4.6, 784_S, 795_W),
whereas C2U shows the opposite pattern (e.g. Fig. 4.5,
773_S), as a result of the migration between winter and sum-
mer ranges (Fig. 5). Alternatively, undeﬁned sequences may
correspond to sequential behaviours we did not simulate,
such as the shift from homogeneous closed to homogeneous
open sequential habitat use within the bimonthly period (e.g.
Fig. 4.5, 767_W).
Fig. 5. Clusters of real bimonthly trajectories with similar patterns of sequential habitat use in their spatial context. Legend in bottom-right panel.
© 2015 The Authors. Methods in Ecology and Evolution © 2015 British Ecological Society, Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 7, 369–379
Spatio-temporal patterns in roe deer habitat use
375
 2041210x, 2016, 3, Downloaded from https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/2041-210X.12453, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
SEQUENTIAL HABITAT USE VS. DESCRIPTIVE
VARIABLES
Descriptive variables of individual sequences, in particular
migration occurrence, sex and age, enabled to further inter-
pret the classiﬁcation of trajectories in ﬁrst- and second-
order clusters. In winter, individual trajectories were classi-
ﬁed both at high and at low elevation, regardless of the
space-use strategy (i.e. both migrants and non-migrants; see
Figs 4 and 6a). Conversely, in summer migrants’ trajectories
were always classiﬁed at high elevation and non-migrants’
mainly at low elevation. Sequences that were classiﬁed as
alternating mainly belonged to migrants, whereas homoge-
neous open sequences equally corresponded to migrant and
non-migrant individuals (Figs 4 and 6c). Finally, more than
60% of the non-migrant sequences were either classiﬁed as
homogeneous closed or random.
Interestingly, trajectories of fawns were classiﬁed at low ele-
vation, both in summer and in winter, except one sequence
(Figs 4 and 6b). In terms of second-order clusters, trajectories
of fawns were classiﬁed in the great majority as homogeneous
closed or random (Figs 4 and 6d). Adults’ sequences were
more equally distributed between diﬀerent patterns of habitat
use.
ASSESSMENT OF PREDICTIONS AND CASE STUDY
DISCUSSION
The ﬁrst clear spatio-temporal pattern that emerged in the
study of roe deer population through exploratory analysis with
SAM is a diﬀerential use of altitude. This can be linked to mi-
gration for two pieces of evidence: ﬁrst, some individuals with
sequences classiﬁed at high elevation in some trees also showed
sequences classiﬁed at low elevation in other trees (Fig. 4, e.g.
individual 799). Secondly, some sequences from the same indi-
viduals included both high and low altitudes in the migration
periods, when animals move between seasonal ranges (Fig. 4,
e.g. individual 797, Fig. 5 – undeﬁned). Moreover, the classiﬁ-
cation of sequences in high- and low-elevation clusters can be
attributed to partial migration for a further evidence; that is,
sequences of some other individuals were always included in
the low-elevation cluster (Fig. 4, e.g. individual 783), or always
across both (Fig. 4, e.g. individual 784); that is, they were resi-
dent. As such, prediction P1a is supported.
The property of SAM as a valid exploratory tool to identify
spatio-temporal patterns of individual movements was also
highlighted when looking at descriptive variables. Sequential
use of high and low elevations was same among sexes (Fig. 4:
sequences of both sexes were included in both clusters; P1b),
C1S [n = 33]
C1W [n = 15]
C2S [n = 18]
C2W [n = 14]
mN
mM
0·0
0·2
0·4
0·6
0·8
1·0
C1S [n = 37]
C1W [n = 19]
C2S [n = 31]
C2W [n = 24]
aY
aF
aA
0·0
0·2
0·4
0·6
0·8
1·0
mN [n = 31]
mM [n = 41]
O
A
R
C
0·0
0·2
0·4
0·6
0·8
1·0
aA [n = 79]
aF [n = 19]
O
A
R
C
0·0
0·2
0·4
0·6
0·8
1·0
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 6. Individual descriptive characteristics are summarized by the clusters to which real individual sequences were assigned. Migration (%; panel
a; migrant-mM, non-migrant-mN) and age (%; panel b; adult-aA, yearling-aY, fawn-aF) in relation to ﬁrst-order clusters (high, C1; low, C2), both in
summer and in winter. Second-order clusters (%; C, R, A, O; see legend, Fig. 4 for meaning of codes) in relation to migration (panel c) and age
(panel d).
© 2015 The Authors. Methods in Ecology and Evolution © 2015 British Ecological Society, Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 7, 369–379
376
J. De Groeve et al.
 2041210x, 2016, 3, Downloaded from https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/2041-210X.12453, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
but not across age classes (Figs 4 and 6; P1c). This is a novel
result for roe deer that opens up new directions of research.
For example, age class could be included as an explanatory
variable to assess partial migratory behaviour of roe deer.
The most innovative outcome of our analysis was the
spatio-temporal analysis of open/closed habitat use by indi-
vidual roe deer. The most obvious, and yet relevant, result
was that roe deer did not always use open/closed habitat at
random (P2a). As predicted, sequences of individuals were
clearly distinguished between homogeneous and heteroge-
neous use or shifted between the two categories. We intend
to underline that by SAM exploratory analysis, we always
looked at sequential use of habitat; that is, habitat selection
was not considered here. The term ‘random’ use, therefore,
does not refer to habitat use according to total habitat
availability, as in classic habitat selection analysis (Manly
et al. 2002), but to sequential use of available habitats as it
would happen by chance. Indeed, we found that sequential
use of habitats was heavily inﬂuenced by availability in the
home range. For example, home ranges including a high
percentage of closed habitat likely resulted in a ‘random’
homogeneous use of closed (Fig. 4.1–4.3, Fig. 5 – homoge-
neous closed). Conversely, home ranges including both open
and closed habitats may lead to ‘random’ use of both
(Figs 4.4–4.6 and 5 – random). Here, we have two observa-
tions. On the one side, the fact that trajectories with a dif-
ferent spatio-temporal pattern laid next one to each other
in the study area (Fig. 5) indicates that sequential habitat
use reﬂects the selection operated by animals to deﬁne their
home ranges within the study area (i.e. second-order habitat
selection, sensu Johnson 1980). On the other side, though,
we had clear evidence of alternative tactics of temporal use
of habitats available within the home range (several exam-
ples of sequences with same total habitat availability, but
diﬀerent sequential patterns, see above and Fig. 4). When
both open and closed were available in home ranges, one
pattern stuck out as particularly well represented, that is
the alternating use of both habitats on a daily basis (P2c;
Figs 4 and 5). To our knowledge, this is among the ﬁrst
systematic exploratory analyses of a behavioural pattern
previously empirically described, and linked to individual
personalities (Bonnot et al. 2015). According to our results,
the propensity of roe deer to expose to open habitats can
result in a systematic spatio-temporal pattern of habitat
use, which is evident only in some individuals (Fig. 4). Even
more, our explorations indicated that migrant individuals
used this pattern much more than resident, at equal habitat
availability in the home range (Figs 4.4–4.6 and 5 – alter-
nating). Migration attitude in partial migratory populations
has been previously attributed to a ‘boldness’ syndrome
(Chapman et al. 2011). Investigating the eﬀect of personali-
ties at both seasonal and daily habitat use scales is a very
exciting research direction that our exploratory results sug-
gest.
A further result that supports the individual diﬀerences in
sequential habitat use is the presence of homogenous open
sequences, an unexpected and yet observed pattern both at
high and at low elevation (P2d; Fig. 4).
Discussion: Application of SAM to animal habitat
use
In this paper, we showed that SAM is a useful and powerful
tool to explore and compare sequences of habitat use by ani-
mals, and extract common spatio-temporal patterns. Impor-
tantly, we took into consideration an aspect of animal ecology
largely overlooked in the literature. Indeed, one of the most
interesting and captivating outcomes of SAM is that diﬀerent
topological levels of trees are associated with hierarchical simi-
larities between the individuals’ sequential use of environmen-
tal features. Repetitive patterns of sequential habitat use are
informative with respect to the interaction between animals
and their environment. In fact, well-known phenomena, such
as migration, or feeding-resting cycles emerge as repetitive pat-
terns of habitat use at diﬀerent temporal scales, as shown by
our study case.
To understand the potential usefulness of SAM for move-
ment ecology, we shall ﬁrst clarify what SAM is not. SAM is
not a spatial explicit method and does not provide predictive
models of habitat use, nor of animal distribution. Instead,
SAM embeds the temporal component of habitat use, in the
form of real ordered sequences of used habitat classes. SAM
can provide information at the population and individual level,
by clustering individuals in trees through robust algorithms
that search for dissimilarities in spatio-temporal patterns of
habitat use. Based on all these considerations, we see SAM as
an approach to explore temporal patterns in habitat use across
an animal population. As such, it diﬀerentiates from and it
complements current exploratory methods in habitat analysis.
The R-package AdehabitatHS provides a suite of niche-based
methods that are primarily used to express the realized niche
(Calenge & Basille 2008). However, niche-based methods are
also meaningful to identify the most relevant explanatory vari-
ables, and their relationships, for predictive habitat selection
models, such as RSF (Boyce et al. 2002). RSF model the prob-
ability of disproportional habitat use in a hypothetical-deduc-
tive framework, by means of selection of competing models. A
preliminary investigation of most relevant variables thus
allows to better express hypotheses, and focuses the analysis.
SAM may complement the aforementioned approaches by
also exploring the temporal component of habitat use patterns.
A big advantage of niche-based methods or recursive partition-
ing trees is their ability to provide a graphical representation of
the importance and relation between variables. Similarly,
SAM summarizes common patterns of sequential habitat use
across the population, by clustering. Importantly, we suggest
that the way to handle the length of the sequences (i.e. time res-
olution and total duration) should depend on the research
questions. In the study case, we decided to split the individuals’
sequences in bimonthly periods, since we were interested in
intra-annual patterns. This design implies that each individual
is present more than once in the trees, and caution must be
© 2015 The Authors. Methods in Ecology and Evolution © 2015 British Ecological Society, Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 7, 369–379
Spatio-temporal patterns in roe deer habitat use
377
 2041210x, 2016, 3, Downloaded from https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/2041-210X.12453, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
taken when interpreting the results (i.e. pseudo-replication
Tukey 1977).
In our exercise, we considered a simple combination of habi-
tat classes, although the R-package TraMineR allows to deﬁne
more complex combinations of environmental parameters. All
the same, sequences based on many habitat classes, would lead
to a very articulated dissimilarity tree, thus likely diﬃcult to
interpret. We therefore suggest a rationale in the combined
and complementary use of the aforementioned methods, when
exploring spatio-temporal patterns in animal movement data.
First, niche-based or recursive partitioning methods or other
simpler multivariate approaches (e.g. PCA) can be applied to
identify the most important and least related environmental
parameters. Then, ordered sequences of locations can be
matched to those variables by spatial join with relevant geo-
graphical layers, and sequences of habitat use thus obtained.
Sequence analysis can then be performed, and provide a repre-
sentation of existing spatio-temporal patterns, or be used to
formulate new hypotheses evaluated through a classic model
selection approach.
Technically, we suggest to simulate expected sequential
behaviours (e.g. based on preliminary classiﬁcations or previ-
ous knowledge, Fig. 1a), and use them as a guide to extract
the sequential habitat use pattern of real sequences, while
accounting for spatial correlation (through the substitution
matrix) and habitat availability. As our study case shows,
real-world sequences can exhibit more complex behaviours
than those represented by simulations. We suggest that if the
great majority of real trajectories are classiﬁed in cluster types
derived from simulations, then the real sequential habitat use
is well represented. Otherwise, one may want to change the
simulation rules, which can be easily modiﬁed in the move-
ment model.
Sequence analysis methods is a well-suited method for data
acquired by animal-borne tracking technologies, since the
method can account for two main limitations related to animal
movement data: missing locations (Frair et al. 2010) and spa-
tial correlation (Dray, Royer-Carenzi & Calenge 2010). We
explicitly remarked for the ﬁrst time that the weight matrix
used by SAM can be used to deal with spatial correlation.
Speciﬁcally, we oﬀer a quantiﬁable and repeatable assessment
of the spatial correlation between diﬀerent habitat classes (i.e.
substitution matrix). Notwithstanding the novelty, future stud-
ies may assess the sensitivity of SAM output to changes in the
substitution matrix.
While the framework presented in this paper is relevant and
innovative in ecological studies, in practice there are also some
limitations to SAM. First, temporal correlation is not directly
accounted, whereas there is a clear temporal association
between consecutive observations. To account for temporal
correlation, a variant of the Hamming distance known as the
fuzzy Hamming distance (Bookstein, Klein & Raita 2001)
could be used, but is only developed for binary data. Secondly,
several researchers in evolutionary biology (e.g. Morrison
2010) and social sciences (e.g. Wu 2000) have argued that many
steps in SAM are based on subjective decisions (e.g. deﬁnition
of classes, parameter settings, interpretation of results).
These limitations notwithstanding, we believe that SAM
oﬀers great advantages and new insights into movement ecol-
ogy studies. For instance, the method can be promptly
extended to multiple or other species than roe deer as well as to
other spatial (e.g. home range) and temporal resolutions (e.g.
hours) and reveal yet underappreciated or overlooked pat-
terns.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to MOVE (COST Action IC0903) to provide funding for two
Short-Term Scientiﬁc Missions (STSMs) to conduct this research. Also, we thank
Fondazione Edmund Mach and Special Research Fund (BOF) of Ghent Univer-
sity for their ﬁnancial support to JDG. Finally, we wish to thank the collaborative
EURODEER project to provide geospatial and environmental data. We are par-
ticularly grateful to Ferdinando Urbano for his support with data management,
to Matteo Marcantonio for precious suggestions in R programming and to Mat-
thias Studer for advice on TraMineR.
Data accessibility
We provide the R script (Appendix S6) to repeat the sequence analysis as here pre-
sented. The full data set is made available in the Dryad digital repository (De
Groeve et al. 2015).
References
Abbott, A. (1995) Sequence analysis: new methods for old ideas. Annual Review
of Sociology, 21, 93–113.
Andrienko, G., Andrienko, N. & Heurich, M. (2011) An event-based conceptual
model for context-aware movement analysis. International Journal of Geo-
graphical Information Science, 25, 1347–1370.
Benhamou, S. & Riotte-Lambert, L. (2012) Beyond the utilization distribution:
identifying home range areas that are intensively exploited or repeatedly vis-
ited. Ecological Modelling, 227, 112–116.
Bonnot, N., Verheyden, H., Blanchard, P., Cote, J., Debeﬀe, L., Cargnelutti, B.,
Klein, F., Hewison, A.J.M. & Morellet, N. (2015) Interindividual variability in
habitat use: evidence for a risk management syndrome in roe deer? Behavioral
Ecology, 26, 105–114.
Bookstein, A., Klein, S.T. & Raita, T. (2001) Fuzzy Hamming distance: a new
dissimilarity measure. Combinatorial Pattern Matching, 2089, 86–97.
Boyce, M.S., Vernier, P.R., Nielsen, S.E. & Schmiegelow, F.K.A. (2002)
Evaluating resource selection functions. Ecological Modelling, 157, 281–
300.
Buchin, M., Dodge, S. & Speckmann, B. (2012) Context-aware similarity of tra-
jectories. Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Geographic Infor-
mation Science (GIScience). Springer, Berlin Heidelberg.
Cagnacci, F., Boitani, L., Powell, R.A. & Boyce, M.S. (2010) Animal ecology
meets GPS-based radiotelemetry: a perfect storm of opportunities and chal-
lenges. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, Biological Sciences,
365, 2157–2162.
Cagnacci, F., Focardi, S., Heurich, M., Stache, A., Hewison, A.J.M., Morellet,
N. et al. (2011) Partial migration in roe deer: migratory and resident tactics are
end points of a behavioural gradient determined by ecological factors. Oikos,
120, 1790–1802.
Calenge, C. (2006) The package adehabitat for the R software: a tool for the anal-
ysis of space and habitat use by animals. Ecological Modelling, 197, 516–519.
Calenge, C. & Basille, M. (2008) A general framework for the statistical
exploration of the ecological niche. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 252,
674–685.
Chapman, B.B., Hulthen, K., Blomqvist, D.R., Hansson, L.-A., Nilsson, J.-A.,
Brodersen, J., Nilsson, P.A., Skov, C. & Br€onmark, C. (2011) To boldly go:
individual diﬀerences in boldness inﬂuence migratory tendency. Ecology Let-
ters, 14, 871–876.
De Groeve, J., Van de Weghe, N., Ranc, N., Ometto, L., Rota-Stabelli, O. &
Cagnacci, F. (2015) Data from: Extracting spatio-temporal patterns in animal
trajectories: an ecological application of sequence analysis methods (SAM).
Dryad Digital Repository. doi:10.5061/dryad.h4f7p.
Delafontaine, M., Versichele, M., Neutens, T. & Van de Weghe, N. (2012) Ana-
lysing spatio-temporal sequences in Bluetooth tracking data. Applied Geogra-
phy, 34, 659–668.
© 2015 The Authors. Methods in Ecology and Evolution © 2015 British Ecological Society, Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 7, 369–379
378
J. De Groeve et al.
 2041210x, 2016, 3, Downloaded from https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/2041-210X.12453, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Dray, S., Royer-Carenzi, M. & Calenge, C. (2010) The exploratory analysis of
autocorrelation in animal-movement studies. Ecological Research, 4, 34–41.
European Environment Agency, EEA (2010) CORINE Land Cover 2006. URL
http://www.eea.europa.eu/dataand-maps/data/corine-land-cover-2000-2006
(accessed 20 August 2015).
Fortin, D., Hawthorne, L.B., Boyce, M.S., Smith, D.W., Duchesne, T. & Mao,
J.S. (2005) Wolves inﬂuence elk movements: behaviour shapes a trophic cas-
cade in Yellowstone national park. Ecology, 86, 1320–1330.
Frair, J.L., Fieberg, J., Hebblewhite, M., Cagnacci, F., DeCesare, N.J. & Pe-
drotti, L. (2010) Resolving issues of imprecise and habitat-biased locations in
ecological analyses using GPS telemetry data. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society B, Biological Sciences, 365, 2187–2200.
Gabadinho, A., Ritschard, G., M€uller, N.S. & Studer, M. (2011) Analyzing and
visualizing state sequences in R with TraMineR. Journal of Statistical Soft-
ware, 40, 1–37.
Hennig, C. (2007) Cluster-wise assessment of cluster stability. Computational
Statistics and Data Analysis, 52, 258–271.
Hewison, A.J.M., Vincent, J.P. & Reby, D. (1998) Social organisation of
European roe deer. The European roe Deer: The Biology of Success (eds R. An-
dersen, P. Duncan & J.D.C. Linnell), pp. 189–219. Scandinavian University
Press, Oslo.
Johnson, D.H. (1980) The comparison of usage and availability measurements
for evaluating resource preference. Ecology, 61, 65–71.
Manly, B., McDonald, L., Thomas, D., MacDonald, T. & Erickson, W. (2002)
Resource Selection by Animals. Statistical Design and Analysis for Field Studies.
Kluwer Academic Publisher, London.
Ministery of Economy, Trade, and Industry of Japan, METI, National Aeronau-
tics and Space Administration of the United States, NASA (2012) Advanced
Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reﬂection Radiometer (ASTER) Global
Digital Elevation Model Version 1 (GDEM V1). URL http://asterweb.jpl.
nasa.gov/gdem.asp (accessed 20 August 2015).
Morrison, D.A. (2010) Sequence alignment: methods, models, concepts, and
strategies. Systematic Biology, 59, 363–365.
Ramanzin, M., Sturaro, E. & Zanon, D. (2007) Seasonal migration and home
range of roe deer (Capreolus capreolus) in the Italian eastern Alps. Canadian
Journal of Zoology, 85, 280–289.
Rodgers, A.R. & Carr, A.P. (1998) HRE: The Home Range Extension for Arc-
View. Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources, Centre for Northern Forest
Ecosystem Research, Thunder Bay, Ontario, Canada. URL http://ﬂash.lake-
headu.ca/~arodgers/hre/ (accessed 4 March 2014).
Sa€ıd, S. & Servanty, S. (2005) The inﬂuence of landscape structure on female roe
deer home-range size. Landscape Ecology, 20, 1003–1012.
Shoval, N. & Isaacson, M. (2007) Sequence alignment as a method for human
activity analysis in space and time. Annals of the Association of American Geog-
raphers, 97, 282–297.
Therneau, T., Atkinson, B. & Ripley, B. (2014) Recursive Partitioning and
Regression
Trees.
URL
http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/rpart/
rpart.pdf (accessed 10 October 2014).
Tufto, J., Andersen, R. & Linnell, J.D.C. (1996) Habitat use and ecological corre-
lates of home range size in a small cervid: the roe deer. Journal of Animal Ecol-
ogy, 65, 715–724.
Tukey, J.W. (1977) Exploratory Data Analysis. Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mas-
sachusetts.
Urbano, F., Cagnacci, F., Calenge, C., Dettki, H., Cameron, A. & Neteler, M.
(2010) Wildlife tracking data management: a new vision. Philosophical transac-
tions of the Royal Society of London Series B, Biological Sciences, 365, 2177–
2185.
Wilson, C. (2008) Activity patterns in space and time: calculation representative
H€agerstrand ClustalG software. Transportation, 35, 485–499.
Wittemyer, G., Polansky, L., Douglas-Hamilton, I. & Getz, W.M. (2008) Disen-
tangling the eﬀects of forage, social rank, and risk on movement autocorrela-
tion of elephants using Fourier and wavelet analyses. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 105, 19108–
19113.
Worton, B.J. (1995) Using Monte-Carlo simulation to evaluate kernel-
based home-range estimators. Journal of Wildlife Management, 59, 794–800.
Wu, L.L. (2000) Some comments on sequence analysis and optimal matching
methods in sociology: review and prospect. Sociological Methods and Research,
29, 41–64.
Received 2 May 2015; accepted 23 July 2015
Handling Editor: Stephane Dray
Supporting Information
Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version
of this article.
Appendix S1. Simulated arenas.
Figure S1.1. Nine square gridded arenas, each composed of 10 000
squared cells of 100 9 100 m, with varying proportions of open (light
colors) and closed (dark colors) habitats (10–90%) at high (blue) and
low elevation (red/orange).
Appendix S2. The movement model.
Appendix S3. Substitution matrix to account for spatial correlation.
Figure S3.1. Simulated dispersed (a), random (b) and clustered (c) spa-
tial distribution of habitat patches based on the shape of the study area.
Figure S3.2. Spatial correlation (Z-scores) in relation to habitat avail-
ability (x-axis, % open habitat) for HCxHC (red), HOxHO (yellow),
LCxLC (blue), LOxLO (light blue).
Table S3.1 Join-Count Statistics for simulated scenarios (a, b, c).
Table S3.2 Substitution matrices for simulated scenarios (a, b, c),
expressed as dissimilarity measured using Join-Counts, i.e. the propor-
tion of the total number of adjacent polygons where the speciﬁed habi-
tat neighbour relationship is not observed.
Table S3.3 Join-Count Statistics for 9 arenas with variable proportions
of open and closed habitats (expressed as the percentage of open habi-
tat). See table S3.1 for explanation of codes.
Table S3.4 Substitution matrices for the nine arenas.
Appendix S4. Trees.
Figure S4.1–4.9. Simulated and roe deer bimonthly sequences of habi-
tat use classes (right portion of the panel; daily scale reported bottom-
right), and resulting dissimilarity tree, based on the Hamming distance
algorithm (left portion of the panel).
Appendix S5. Clusters of real bimonthly sequences.
Figure S5.1 Clusters of real bimonthly sequences with similar patterns
of sequential habitat use, extracted from the corresponding dissimilar-
ity trees.
Appendix S6. R-script of the complete analysis.
© 2015 The Authors. Methods in Ecology and Evolution © 2015 British Ecological Society, Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 7, 369–379
Spatio-temporal patterns in roe deer habitat use
379
 2041210x, 2016, 3, Downloaded from https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/2041-210X.12453, Wiley Online Library on [31/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
