DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/1980-5373-MR-2018-0766
Materials Research. 2019; 22(suppl.2): e20180766
Effects of Gas Nitriding on Fatigue and Crack Initiation of Ti6Al4V produced by Selective 
Laser Melting
Aamir Mukhtara*, Mike Frya, Ben Jacksona , Leandro Bolzonib
Received: November 28, 2018; Revised: May 22, 2019; Accepted: June 03, 2019
Selective laser melting (SLM) is an additive manufacturing technique which permits fabrication 
of three dimensional parts by selectively melting consecutive layers of metallic powder. This allows 
the production of parts with high geometrical complexity. Titanium alloy Ti-6Al-4V (Ti64) is widely 
used in industry due to its high strength-to-mass ratio, corrosion resistance and biocompatibility. SLM 
increases the application range of Ti64 because of its flexibility for prototyping any part and its low 
material waste. Nitriding is a diffusion-based thermo-chemical treatment for interstitial hardening of 
the surface of Ti64 alloy products. This study characterized the fatigue behaviour of SLM-produced 
Ti64 nitrided and annealed bars in as-built and machined surface conditions. The surface of the 
SLM-produced Ti64 parts after gas nitriding showed high values of micro-hardness up to 550 HV 
just below the surface. Fatigue testing was performed to assess the materials fatigue strength and 
fractographic imaging was used to examine fracture surface and nitride layer characteristics. Nitriding 
was found to reduce the fatigue strength of the samples to a similar level irrespective of being in the 
as-built or machined condition. The effect of nitriding on crack initiation and growth at various stress 
levels under fatigue loading was investigated.
Keywords: Selective laser melting, Titanium, Fatigue, Gas nitriding, Crack initiation.
*e-mail: aamir.mukhtar@tida.co.nz
1. Introduction
Selective Laser Melting (SLM), is an established technique 
in additive manufacturing (AM). SLM uses a high-power 
laser beam to fully melt powdered material placed on a flat 
surface, layer-by layer, to build three dimensional solid models 
with high density and usefully high mechanical properties1-3. 
The SLM process has been widely studied for different 
metallic powders, including: steels, titanium, nickel, tungsten, 
aluminium and copper alloys/composites4-10. Applications 
for SLM products include high value-added industries, such 
as medical, aerospace and automotive industries1,11,12. The 
combination of low density, good mechanical properties, 
corrosion resistance, fatigue resistance, high temperature 
performance, and biocompatibility makes titanium alloys 
using SLM, one of the most desirable material/manufacturing 
process combinations in the aerospace and biomedical fields13-15.
Titanium nitriding is a process causing new phase 
formation on the surface of the material with a high hardness 
and a diffusion hardened zone beneath. It is one of the most 
popular thermo-chemical treatments to improve the tribological 
properties of Ti alloys. Nitriding of SLM-produced Ti64 
alloy has been studied in the past and determined a surface 
TiN phase was present with α(N)-Ti interstitial hardening 
of the subsurface also examined16.
Fatigue characterization of Ti alloys produced by AM17-25 
has also been widely investigated and data on fatigue life 
revealed important variability for a given applied stress19. 
The fracture toughness in SLM-produced Ti64 parts was 
found to be higher when the specimen notch was oriented 
perpendicular to the build layers. At low stress ratios, the 
crack growth rates were faster than in wrought titanium but 
became comparable at higher ratios17. Hot isostatic pressing 
(HIP) significantly improved the fatigue properties of SLM 
manufactured Ti64 material. Internal fatigue crack initiation 
was observed in very high cycle fatigue regimes as well as 
surface fatigue crack initiation from surface defects18. Ti64 
samples produced by AM technique showed a significant 
improvement of ductility and fatigue strength by reduction 
of porosity using HIP20 and improved fracture toughness 
values with a high temperature heat treatment22.
Charkaluk observed three types of defect for the additively 
manufactured Ti64 parts: surface defects, un-melted zones, 
and small internal defects24. HIP treatment improved fatigue 
strength by decreasing the defects size, while the manufacturing 
direction was found to influence the presence of un-melted 
zones. Leuders et al.26,27 studied post-process treatment effects 
on fatigue resistance and reported that SLM-produced Ti64 
had an extended crack initiation phase, achieved by reducing 
aTiDA Ltd, Toi Ohomai Institute of Technology, Tauranga, New Zealand
bWaikato Centre for Advanced Materials (WaiCAM), The University of Waikato, Hamilton, New Zealand
Mukhtar et al.
2
Materials Research
the porosity, which lead to a significant improvement in 
fatigue strength26. Under cyclic loading, SLM-produced 
Ti64 benefitted from HIP at a temperature of 920 °C.27. 
Yavari et al. studied the fatigue behaviour of porous Ti64 
structures with different porosity levels manufactured using 
SLM and reported that S-N curves of porous structures 
with higher porosities were found to be lower than those 
with lower porosities28. Recently, fatigue crack propagation 
behaviour was examined for the SLM-produced porous Ti64 
biomaterials with porosities between 66% and 84%, using 
compact-tension specimens29.
Nitriding of titanium alloys is widely employed to 
improve wear resistance and surface hardness. As such its 
influence on fatigue properties for critical applications is 
important. The fatigue behaviour of gas-nitrided Ti64 alloy 
was found to have reduced fatigue life compared to those 
of the corresponding annealed material. The fatigue limit 
was however, improved slightly under certain nitriding 
conditions. The reduction in fatigue strength of the nitrided 
material was primarily attributed to premature crack initiation 
in the nitrided layer30,31.
This present study aims to add to previous work by 
investigating how gas nitriding affects the fatigue properties 
of Ti64 manufactured using the SLM technique. Comparisons 
were made using samples in both nitrided and annealed states, 
with as-built and machined surface conditions. Specifically, 
the nature of cracks formed under fatigue conditions will be 
examined to understand how differences in fatigue failure 
might occur.
2. Experimental Procedure
All Ti64 samples were fabricated using SLM on an EOS 
M270 Machine. The machine was equipped with a Nd:YAG 
laser with a maximum power of 200 W. The SLM process 
was carried out in a closed chamber purged with argon gas to 
reduce the oxygen level to <0.1%. Parts were made from gas 
atomised, spherical Ti64 powder sourced from FalconTech 
Co. Ltd. meeting Titanium Grade 23 specification. This had a 
particle size distribution of 15µm (d10) and 45µm (d90), obtained 
using a laser diffraction particle size analyser (Analysette 22 
Microtechplus, Fritsch). Samples were built in a vertical (Z 
axis) orientation in the SLM machine, generally considered 
as a worse case for properties, and avoided surface finish 
of the test section being influenced by the support material 
that would be required with horizontal built specimens. All 
samples were circular cross section. Rotating bend fatigue 
(RBF) specimens were "hour glass" form as shown in Fig. 1 
with 5mm diameter at the minimum section.
Samples were tested in as-built and machined conditions 
to see if surface finish influenced fatigue performance. 
As-built specimens were manufactured at nominal test 
diameter while machined specimens were printed with 1mm 
increased diameter and machined to nominal test diameter. 
Figure 1. Nominal RBF sample geometry for SLM-produced Ti64.
Machining was undertaken on a CNC lathe in a commercial 
machine shop. Surface finish of the machined specimens was 
approximately Ra = 3 to 6 µm while the as-built surface was 
around Ra < 15 µm.
The as-built and machined, SLM-produced Ti64 bars 
were gas nitrided or annealed following the procedure 
outlined in Table 1. These treatments were carried out using 
a vacuum sintering furnace with heating performed at a rate 
of 10 °C/min and natural furnace cooling after the treatment 
time. High purity nitrogen gas was introduced with a fully 
controlled gas flow regulator (Vögtlin Instruments). Vickers 
microhardness measurements were used to identify the case 
depth of the nitride layer with a load of 50 g and a loading 
duration of 10 s.
Table 1. Method of vacuum furnace thermal treatment trials for 
Ti64 bars produced by SLM.
Process
Process 
Temperature
Time at process 
temperature
Atmosphere
ºC
hours
Annealing
850
4
Argon
Nitriding
850
4
Nitrogen17
Fatigue testing was performed on an in-house developed 
rotating bend fatigue testing machine based on Wöhler 
cantilever arrangement at 50 Hz rotation frequency. Two 
different samples that failed at different applied stress were 
selected for each condition to investigate residual fatigue 
cracks. The selected fatigue sample conditions and fatigue 
life for each are presented in Table 2.
Preparation for analysis of these residual cracks in the 
failed fatigue samples was performed by sectioning length-
ways with an abrasive cutter (AbrasiMatic 300). This was 
followed by mounting and polishing the specimen to reveal 
any fatigue-initiated cracks along the samples length. Imaging 
(Zeiss EVO MA25 scanning electron microscope (SEM)) was 
used to examine the cross sections and measurements were 
recorded for crack length and location of crack with respect to 
fracture site. Fig. 2 shows SEM cross section micrographs of 
fatigue sample and some typical crack sites for SLM-produced 
Ti64 RBF nitrided specimen. Using this method cracks longer 
than 2µm could be accurately characterised.
3
Effects of Gas Nitriding on Fatigue and Crack Initiation of Ti6Al4V produced by Selective Laser Melting
Figure 2. (a) Cross section micrograph of the fatigue fracture surface and (b) backscattered image of some crack sites for sectioned and 
prepared SLM-produced Ti64 RBF specimen.
Table 2. Summary of fatigue samples sectioned and investigated 
for residual cracks.
Specimen
Surface 
condition
Nominal 
stress
Cycles to 
failure
MPa
×103
Nitrided (N)
As-Built 
(AB)
255
161
493
14
Machined 
(M)
294
259
502
12
Annealed (A)
As-Built 
(AB)
300
202
487
21
Machined 
(M)
407
61
485
58
3. Results and Discussion
To evaluate the high-cycle-fatigue behaviour, RBF 
tests were conducted on SLM-produced as-built (AB) and 
machined (M) samples in nitrided and annealed condition. All 
fatigue tests were carried out at different stress amplitudes to 
explore fatigue lives comprising between 104 and 107 cycles. 
Tests were terminated at 107 cycles with this regarded as 
runout and the fatigue limit of the material. Fig. 3 shows 
the S-N curves of nitrided and annealed specimens in the 
different surface conditions. The fatigue limit in the nitrided 
condition AB and M specimens was 240 MPa and 287 MPa 
respectively. In the annealed condition machining improved 
the fatigue limit to 355 MPa compared to 285 MPa in the 
as-built material. Machining the surface of SLM-produced 
Ti64 in annealed condition improved the fatigue life while 
no clear benefit from machining was seen with the nitrided 
specimens. This suggests that nitriding may act as a crack 
initiation feature that acts to level the effect of other surface 
geometry concentrating factors.
Fig. 4 (a) and (b) present the number of cracks and 
average crack length for each of the specimens. Low and 
Figure 3. S-N curves for RBF of SLM-produced Ti64 material with 
machined and as-built surface, comparing nitrided and annealed 
conditions.
high designation in the sample labels are given to note 
the nominal stress level for the sample (Table 2). In both 
annealed and nitrided samples there was a greater number of 
residual cracks in the higher stress samples. This is expected 
due to the greater stress enabling crack initiation. Across all 
the samples there is no overall difference in the number of 
cracks between nitriding and annealing. Annealing shows 
reduced number of cracks in the machined samples which is 
not the case for the nitrided ones. This supports the fatigue 
life data where the surface geometry in nitrided samples had 
little effect on the performance of the material.
Average crack length is also found to be longer in the 
high stressed samples. A higher stress increases the rate of 
crack propagation so combined with increased crack initiation 
the average crack length is expected to be greater. This is 
especially evident in the nitrided material. Significantly, the 
average crack length of the nitrided samples was considerably 
greater than that of the annealed material despite similarities 
in the number of cracks observed. This suggests that through 
nitriding, a larger proportion of cracks were enabled to grow 
to greater lengths as a result of earlier initiation of crack or 
faster crack propagation.
Mukhtar et al.
4
Materials Research
Figure 4. (a) Number of cracks and (b) average crack length for the sectioned RBF samples. (See Table 2 for samples' condition details).
Crack length is plotted against local stress for each crack 
observed in the RBF samples and the results are shown in 
Fig. 5 (a) for nitrided samples and Fig. 5 (b) for annealed 
samples. Local stress was calculated allowing for a difference 
in bending moment and specimen diameter at the location 
of the individual crack.
In the nitrided samples (Fig. 5 (a)) there is an evident 
increase in maximum observed crack length for an increase 
in applied stress. At higher stress cracks were present at 
lengths between 40 µm and 300 µm with an even distribution 
throughout that range. At low stress levels cracks were 
observed to be much smaller not exceeding 105 µm. As-built 
Figure 5. Local stress at each crack site vs crack length for (a) nitrided and (b) annealed RBF samples in different surface conditions.
5
Effects of Gas Nitriding on Fatigue and Crack Initiation of Ti6Al4V produced by Selective Laser Melting
samples appeared to have longer residual cracks than those 
present in the machined material, due to the easier crack 
initiation in the rougher surface allowing more time for the 
crack to grow. The nitrided, machined material at low stress 
appeared to have longer cracks than the as-built material. 
This difference could be due to the samples having been 
tested at a slightly higher stress (294 MPa compared to 255 
MPa) which may account for this difference.
The annealed samples (Fig. 5 (b)) showed maximum crack 
lengths far below those of the nitrided material, not exceeding 
82 µm. Again, the higher stressed sample displayed longer 
cracks however this was not as pronounced as in the nitrided 
condition. As-built samples also had the maximum residual 
crack length, however this was not significantly greater than 
the machined samples. In the samples investigated, minimum 
cracks less than 10 µm were present in all cases which was 
different to the higher stress levels in the nitrided material.
To try and explain the difference in crack length and 
reduced fatigue life of the nitrided material, the case depth 
of the nitride layer was investigated through microhardness 
as shown in Fig. 6. The nitriding process is a diffusion-based 
mechanism which generates a reducing hardness profile into 
the material. The hardness reduced from 550 HV just below 
the surface of the nitrided samples to the bulk Ti64 hardness 
of 350 HV at a depth of 30 µm from the surface. In nitrided 
samples the cracks at high stress were no shorter than 45 µm 
(Fig. 5 (a)). The minimum observed crack was greater than 
the thickness of the nitride layer. This suggests that cracks 
may propagate through the nitride layer very rapidly, so crack 
lengths will always be greater than the nitrided layer and 
as such no short length cracks were observed to be present. 
The cracks in the annealed samples support this as there are 
short cracks present when subject to high stress.
fatigue test or did not experience the same propagation rate 
through the nitride layer seen at high stress. Because of this 
these cracks remain short.
For a crack to grow it must be above the threshold 
stress for the material. Because the cracks initiate and grow 
rapidly through the nitride layer at higher stress, when they 
reach the bulk material the cracks are now sufficiently long 
to continue to grow. Because of Paris's law this will result 
in the cracks having a high stress intensity, and as such, a 
higher growth rate into the centre of the fatigue samples. The 
cracks observed in the nitrided material were longer than 
those of the annealed samples due to this fast growth through 
the nitride layer and consequently faster growth rate through 
the bulk material. The annealed samples didn't experience 
this initial rapid growth rate and as such propagated much 
more slowly.
Different cracks that formed in the nitrided material under 
fatigue are presented in Fig. 7. This shows cracks parallel to 
the surface at a depth of less than 20 µm, putting them within 
the nitrided layer. Nitrogen is known to reduce toughness 
and embrittle titanium so being subject to a higher bending 
moment and subsequent high stress at the surface could 
cause the nitrided layer to fracture in this way, separating 
from the substrate material. These parallel cracks were not 
included in the count of fatigue cracks. A classic fatigue crack 
propagating perpendicular to the surface into the material 
is also shown in Fig. 7 highlighting the difference between 
surface and fatigue cracking.
Figure 6. Hardness measurements indicating the thickness of the 
nitride layer. Measurements taken from a sectioned Ti64 RBF 
sample with machined then nitrided surface.
At lower stress in the nitrided material, cracks were 
present which were shorter than the thickness of the nitrided 
layer. The cracks in this case either initiated later in the 
Figure 7. Cross section image of the surface of an as-built, nitrided, 
RBF sample showing different crack features. Surface cracks running 
parallel to the fatigue samples surface as well as a perpendicular 
fatigue crack into the bulk material.
For the observations made in these samples there are 
limitations. The cracks observed are not necessarily the 
actual maximum crack length as the section could be taken 
through one side of the crack thus understating its length. 
This is possibly the case with the annealed, machined sample 
at lower stress. Only one crack was observed in this sample.
If the section were taken at a different orientation, 
different cracks may have been observed. This data only 
Mukhtar et al.
6
Materials Research
serves to understate the number of cracks and crack lengths 
so serves as a conservative lower boundary compared to 
the real effects. The crack that causes failure is always the 
longest crack, so the maximum length of crack observed 
here must not be taken as the critical crack length.
4. Conclusions
Nitriding was shown to reduce the fatigue life of AM 
Ti64 compared to AM Ti64 subject to the same thermal 
treatment without nitriding. This can be attributed to the 
brittle nitrided layer that allowed early crack initiation, rapid 
crack propagation through to the bulk material as well as 
faster growth rate of these cracks.
At lower stress this effect was less pronounced as there 
were similar crack lengths in the annealed material. There 
were also cracks at lengths that placed them within the 
nitrided layer.
There was evidence that the nitride layer suffered some 
delamination with cracks running parallel to the surface 
present at a depth still within the hardened coating.
5. Acknowledgments
The authors want to acknowledge the financial support 
from New Zealand Ministry of Business, Innovation and 
Employment (MBIE) through the TiTeNZ (Titanium 
Technologies New Zealand) research contract.
6. References
1.	 Yap CY, Chua CK, Dong ZL, Liu ZH, Zhang DQ, Loh LE, et al. 
Review of selective laser melting: Materials and Applications. 
Applied Physics Reviews. 2015;2(4):041101.
2.	 Van Hooreweder B, Kruth JP. Advanced fatigue analysis of 
metal lattice structures produced by Selective Laser Melting. 
CIRP Annals. 2017;66(1):221-224.
3.	 Wei C, Li L, Zhang X, Chueh YH. 3D printing of multiple 
metallic materials via modified selective laser melting. CIRP 
Annals. 2018;67(1):245-248.
4.	 Ivekovic A, Omidvari N, Vrancken B, Lietaert K, Thijs L, 
Vanmeensel K, et al. Selective laser melting of tungsten and 
tungsten alloys. International Journal of Refractory Metals & 
Hard Materials. 2018;72:27-32.
5.	 Kruth JP, Froyen L, Van Vaerenbergh J, Mercelis P, Rombouts 
M, Lauwers B. Selective laser melting of iron-based powder. 
Journal of Materials Processing Technology. 2004;149(1-
3):616-622.
6.	 Thijs L, Verhaeghe F, Craeghs T, Van Humbeeck J, Kruth JP. 
A study of the microstructural evolution during selective laser 
melting of Ti-6Al-4V. Acta Materialia. 2010;58(9):3303-3312.
7.	 Song B, Dong S, Zhang B, Liao H, Coddet C. Effects of 
processing parameters on microstructure and mechanical 
property of selective laser melted Ti6Al4V. Materials & Design. 
2012;35:120-125.
8.	 Amato KN, Gaytan SM, Murr LE, Martinez E, Shindo PW, 
Hernandez J, et al. Microstructures and mechanical behaviour 
of Inconel 718 fabricated by selective laser melting. Acta 
Materialia. 2012;60(5):2229-2239.
9.	 Li R, Shi Y, Wang Z, Wang L, Liu J, Jiang W. Densification 
behaviour of gas and water atomized 316L stainless steel 
powder during selective laser melting. Applied Surface Science. 
2010;256(13):4350-4356.
10.	 Dai D, Gu D. Thermal behaviour and densification mechanism 
during selective laser melting of copper matrix composites: 
Simulation and experiments. Materials & Design. 2014;55:482-
491.
11.	 Yadroitsev I, Krakhmalev P, Yadroitsava I. Selective laser melting 
of Ti6Al4V alloy for biomedical applications: Temperature 
monitoring and microstructural evolution. Journal of Alloys 
and Compounds. 2014;583:404-409.
12.	 Boyer RR. An overview on the use of titanium in the aerospace 
industry. Materials Science and Engineering: A. 1996;213(1-
2):103-114.
13.	 Murr LE, Quinones SA, Gaytan SM, Lopez MI, Rodela A, 
Martinez EY, et al. Microstructure and mechanical behaviour 
of Ti-6Al-4V produced by rapid-layer manufacturing, for 
biomedical applications. Journal of the Mechanical Behaviour 
of Biomedical Materials. 2009;2(1):20-32.
14.	 Kumar P, Prakash O, Ramamurty U. Micro-and meso-structures 
and their influence on mechanical properties of selectively laser 
melted Ti-6Al-4V. Acta Materialia. 2018;154:246-260.
15.	 Zhang H, Zhao J, Liu J, Qin H, Ren Z, Doll GL, et al. The 
effects of electrically-assisted ultrasonic nanocrystal surface 
modification on 3D-printed Ti-6Al-4V alloy. Additive 
Manufacturing. 2018;22:60-68.
16.	 Franz P, Mukhtar A, Downing W, Smith G, Jackson B. Mechanical 
Behaviour of Gas Nitrided Ti6Al4V Bars Produced by Selective 
Laser Melting. Key Engineering Materials. 2016;704:225-234.
17.	 Edwards P, Ramulu M. Effect of build direction on the fracture 
toughness and fatigue crack growth in selective laser melted 
Ti-6Al-4V. Fatigue & Fracture of Engineering Materials & 
Structures. 2015;38(10):1228-1236.
18.	 Günther J, Krewerth D, Lippmann T, Leuders S, Tröster T, 
Weidner A, et al. Fatigue life of additively manufactured Ti-
6Al-4V in the very high cycle fatigue regime. International 
Journal of Fatigue. 2017;94(Pt 2):236-245.
19.	 Li P, Warner DH, Fatemi A, Phan N. Critical assessment of 
the fatigue performance of additively manufactured Ti-6Al-4V 
and perspective for future research. International Journal of 
Fatigue. 2016;85:130-143.
20.	 Kasperovich G, Hausmann J. Improvement of fatigue resistance 
and ductility of TiAl6V4 processed by selective laser melting. 
Journal of Materials Processing Technology. 2015;220:202-
214.
21.	 Nicoletto G. Anisotropic high cycle fatigue behaviour of Ti-
6Al-4V obtained by powder bed laser fusion. International 
Journal of Fatigue. 2017;94(Pt 2):255-262.
7
Effects of Gas Nitriding on Fatigue and Crack Initiation of Ti6Al4V produced by Selective Laser Melting
22.	 Greitemeier D, Palm F, Syassen F, Melz T. Fatigue performance 
of additive manufactured TiAl6V4 using electron and laser 
beam melting. International Journal of Fatigue. 2017;94(Pt 
2):211-217.
23.	 Zhao S, Li SJ, Wang SG, Hou WT, Li Y, Zhang LC, et al. 
Compressive and fatigue behaviour of functionally graded 
Ti-6Al-4V meshes fabricated by electron beam melting. Acta 
Materialia. 2018;150:1-15.
24.	 Chastand V, Quaegebeur P, Maia W, Charkaluk E. Comparative 
study of fatigue properties of Ti-6Al-4V specimens built by 
electron beam melting (EBM) and selective laser melting 
(SLM). Materials Characterization. 2018;143:76-81.
25.	 Wu Y, Bao R. Fatigue crack tip strain evolution and crack growth 
prediction under single overload in laser melting deposited Ti-
6.5Al-3.5Mo-1.5Zr-0.3Si titanium alloy. International Journal 
of Fatigue. 2018;116:462-472.
26.	 Leuders S, Thöne M, Riemer A, Niendorf T, Tröster T, Richard 
HA, et al. On the mechanical behaviour of titanium alloy TiAl6V4 
manufactured by selective laser melting: Fatigue resistance and 
crack growth performance. International Journal of Fatigue. 
2013;48:300-307.
27.	 Leuders S, Lieneke T, Lammers S, Tröster T, Niendorf T. On 
the fatigue properties of metals manufactured by selective laser 
melting - The role of ductility. Journal of Materials Research. 
2014;29(17):1911-1919.
28.	 Yavari SA, Wauthle R, van der Stoke J, Riemslag AC, Janssen 
M, Mulier M, et al. Fatigue behaviour of porous biomaterials 
manufactured using selective laser melting. Materials Science 
and Engineering: C. 2013;33(8):4849-4858.
29.	 Hedayati R, Yavari SA, Zadpoor AA. Fatigue crack propagation 
in additively manufactured porous biomaterials. Materials 
Science and Engineering: C. 2017;76:457-463.
30.	 Shibata H, Tokaji K, Ogawa T, Hori C. The effect of gas nitriding 
on fatigue behaviour in titanium alloys. International Journal 
of Fatigue. 1994;16(6):370-376.
31.	 Tokaji K, Ogawa T, Shibata H, Kamiya Y. Effect of Gas Nitriding 
on Fatigue Behaviour of Ti6Al4V Alloy. Transactions of the Japan 
Society of Mechanical Engineers, Part A. 1991;57(542):2293-
2299.
