On the Validity of Arrest as a Proxy for Offense:
Race and the Likelihood of Arrest for Violent Crimes
Riccardo Fogliato
rfogliat@andrew.cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University
Alice Xiang
Sony AI
Zachary Lipton
Carnegie Mellon University
Daniel Nagin
Carnegie Mellon University
Alexandra Chouldechova
Carnegie Mellon University
ABSTRACT
The risk of re-offense is considered in decision-making at many
stages of the criminal justice system, from pre-trial, to sentencing,
to parole. To aid decision makers in their assessments, institutions
increasingly rely on algorithmic risk assessment instruments (RAIs).
These tools assess the likelihood that an individual will be arrested
for a new criminal offense within some time window following their
release. However, since not all crimes result in arrest, RAIs do not
directly assess the risk of re-offense. Furthermore, disparities in the
likelihood of arrest can potentially lead to biases in the resulting risk
scores. Several recent validations of RAIs have therefore focused on
arrests for violent offenses, which are viewed as being more accurate
reflections of offending behavior. In this paper, we investigate biases
in violent arrest data by analysing racial disparities in the likelihood
of arrest for White and Black violent offenders. We focus our study
on 2007–2016 incident-level data of violent offenses from 16 US
states as recorded in the National Incident Based Reporting System
(NIBRS). Our analysis shows that the magnitude and direction of
the racial disparities depend on various characteristics of the crimes.
In addition, our investigation reveals large variations in arrest rates
across geographical locations and offense types. We discuss the
implications of the observed disconnect between re-arrest and re-
offense in the context of RAIs and the challenges around the use of
data from NIBRS to correct for the sampling bias.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Applied computing →Law, social and behavioral sciences.
KEYWORDS
NIBRS; risk assessment instrument; crime; racial disparity
1
INTRODUCTION
Recidivism risk assessment instruments (RAIs) are increasingly
used to inform decisions throughout the criminal justice system [86].
To justify their adoption, practitioners, vendors, and scholars often
claim that the use of RAIs can lead to more objective, transparent,
and fair decisions [58, 73, 88]. However, the ability of RAIs to help
achieve these ambitious goals has been contested [5, 59]. A major
concern is that the RAIs themselves may exhibit problematic predic-
tive biases. In May 2016, an investigation by ProPublica examined
COMPAS, an RAI used in Broward County, Florida, finding that the
Accepted at AAAI/ACM Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Ethics, and Society
(AIES), 2021.
tool’s predictions exhibited a higher false positive rate for Black (vs.
White) defendants and thus concluding that COMPAS was biased
against Black defendants [3]. Critics rebutted these claims, arguing
that error rate imbalance did not necessarily indicate racial bias and
that RAIs should be assessed for predictive parity and calibration,
two properties that COMPAS satisfied [26, 54]. Later work on the
topic showed that predictive parity and error rate balance cannot
be simultaneously satisfied when the recidivism rates differ across
demographic groups [20, 22, 74], sparking a flurry of technical re-
search on algorithmic fairness within the machine learning commu-
nity. These papers, many of which draw on the ProPublica-COMPAS
dataset, tend to focus on metrics for capturing bias, techniques for
mitigating bias as measured by these metrics, and characterizing
fundamental tradeoffs [1, 9, 19, 27, 61, 67].
Problematically, much of this work rests on the assumption that
the observed outcomes (a.k.a. dependent variables) represent ground
truth. Potential sources of bias in the training data are often over-
looked. For example, many bias mitigation strategies amount to
equalizing the RAI’s performance across racial groups with respect
to some metric based on re-arrest outcomes. However, it is widely
acknowledged that arrest data are affected by sampling bias1 [15]
and re-arrest may represent an imperfect proxy for the target of
interest, re-offense. Importantly, there is ample evidence that racial
minorities tend to face higher risk of arrest, especially for crimes
targeted through proactive policing, such as drug and traffic of-
fenses [57, 82, 94]. Thus, individuals with the same probability of
re-offense may nevertheless have different probabilities of re-arrest.
RAIs trained on such data may appear to be fair predictors of re-
arrest but nevertheless be unfair, even by the same metrics, were
they to be assessed on re-offense [55].
In recognition of this potential discrepancy, recent work on model
validation has primarily examined the predictive bias of RAIs as pre-
dictors of re-arrest for violent crimes. Such arrests are viewed as rep-
resenting “the most unbiased criterion [of offense] available” [103].
Beck and Blumstein [8], for instance, concluded that statistics based
on arrests for violent offenses could be an (almost) racially-unbiased
proxy of criminal involvement. These arguments are generally premised
upon three central pieces of evidence [119]. First, the racial compo-
sition of violent offenders recorded in victimization reports roughly
matches that reported in arrest data [8, 63, 112]. Second, several
analyses of violent offenses known to law enforcement have found
that Black offenders are arrested at lower rates than White offenders
1Sampling bias arises when not all elements of the population of interest are equally
likely to be sampled. In the presence of sampling bias, the characteristics of the col-
lected sample of observations, which is said to be affected by “sample bias”, are not
representative of the characteristics of the population from which the sample is drawn.
arXiv:2105.04953v1  [stat.AP]  11 May 2021
AIES ’21, May 19–21, 2021, Virtual Event, USA.
Fogliato, Xiang, Lipton, Nagin, Chouldechova
[25, 96]. Third, unlike in the case of lower level crimes, in the case
of violent crimes police are granted much more limited discretion
on whether to make an arrest.
This body of evidence suggests that, overall, White violent of-
fenders are at least as likely as Black violent offenders to be arrested,
and hence that the overrepresentation of Blacks among arrestees
is attributable to differential involvement in offending. The cited
evidence does not, however, indicate that all offenses are equally
likely to result in arrests, i.e., that, conditional on situational and con-
textual factors, the likelihood of arrest is equal across racial groups.
In absence of such evidence, it remains unclear whether re-arrest
outcomes could be considered a reliable proxy for re-offense.
In this paper, we show that the likelihood of arrest for violent
crimes varies with the characteristics of the offense, including the
offender’s race. Our analysis is based on incident-level data of violent
offenses involving lone victims and offenders as reported by police
agencies to the FBI in 16 US states between 2007 and 2016 through
the National Incident Based Reporting System (NIBRS), a national
crime data collection program. We focus on incidents involving only
Black or White victims and offenders.
We find that arrest rates vary substantially across offense types and
geographical locations. Controlling for the state, White and Black
offenders are arrested at similar rates for crimes of forcible rape and
murder. For assaults and robbery, however, arrest rates are generally
higher for White offenders. This counterintuitive pattern is largely
explained by the lower arrest rates in jurisdictions with larger shares
of Black offenders. We offer two potential explanations for these
findings. First, consistent with the hypothesis of benign neglect and
based on a perspective of victim devaluing, fewer policing resources
are allocated to solving the least serious forms of violent crimes
that involve Black victims. Second, due to higher levels of legal
cynicism, which can be traced back to a history of over-policing
and systemic discrimination, Black communities may be less likely
to cooperate with law enforcement. Through a regression analysis,
we assess whether the observed racial disparities in the likelihood
of arrest can be explained by crimes characteristics. Due to the
(perhaps unavoidable) misspecification of our modeling approach,
the strength and direction of the association between the offender’s
race and the likelihood of arrest depend on the sample of crimes that
is considered. These findings indicate that simple models targeting
the “effect” of race, which have been used in a plethora of studies
like ours, may not fully capture the complexities of the role of race
in arrests.
The large variations in the likelihood of arrest across crimes char-
acteristics, namely geographical areas and offense types, together
with the presence of racial disparities, call into question the relia-
bility of arrests as a proxy for violent offending. We discuss how
the sampling biases observed in the data can affect the training and
assessment of RAIs, leading to the severe underestimation of the
probability of re-offense for certain subgroups of offenders (e.g.,
sex offenders). Finally, we discuss why the observed sampling bias
cannot be corrected using data from NIBRS alone.
2
BACKGROUND
Prior research studying racial disparities in the likelihood of arrest
for violent offenses has generally fallen into two broad categories: (i)
macro-level analyses studying the relationship between arrest rates
and geographical or socioeconomic factors; and (ii) micro-level
analyses examining associations between between the likelihood of
arrest and the characteristics of the incident and parties involved.
Macro-level studies of the likelihood of arrest tend to fall into one
of two (not mutually exclusive) theoretical frameworks: minority
threat and benign neglect. The minority threat hypothesis [12, 72]
asserts that the majority group (Whites) attempts to control the mi-
nority group (e.g., Blacks) by imposing stronger formal mechanisms
of social control, such as policing. According to this theory, we
might expect to observe a positive association between the share of
Black residents in an area and the size of the police force and arrest
rates. The correlation between these factors may be weaker when
interactions between the majority and the minority are limited, such
as in regions where racial segregation is strongest [108]. The benign
neglect hypothesis [79] posits that, as the size of the Black popula-
tion grows, rates of intraracial crime are likely to increase as well.
Whites may then weaken the mechanisms of social control on the
Black population in racially segregated neighborhoods through a re-
duction in policing resources. As a result, Black victims would face
difficulties in legitimating their complaints and convincing police
officers to take action [125]. Under this hypothesis, we might ex-
pect arrest rates to be lower in predominantly Black neighborhoods.
The two frameworks emphasize different socioeconomic drivers of
differential arrest: While the minority threat hypothesis focuses on
the role of race as a threat (be it economical or political), the benign
neglect hypothesis emphasizes the devaluation of Black victims.
Both hypotheses have received mixed empirical support [91]. The
size of the police force has been shown to be positively associated
with the share of Black population in the area [71, 108]. Kent and
Jacobs [71] found that the most highly racially segregated cities with
larger Black populations tend to have smaller police forces, whereas
Stults and Baumer [108] reported a positive association between
the level of racial segregation and the size of police forces. Other
studies have reported that arrest rates for Black offenders are nega-
tively associated with the share of Black residents in the city [92],
negatively associated with the level of racial segregation [80, 107],
and positively associated with the share of interracial crime [29].
Arrest rates for homicide have been shown to be lower in predomi-
nantly Black neighborhoods [30, 97], and higher in large cities with
substantial socioeconomic disparities between the two groups [14].
In our analysis, we also found that arrest rates are lower in police
agencies with larger proportions of Black offenders.
The second area of work focuses on racial disparities at the micro
level. Here, researchers typically attempt to isolate the effects of po-
lice discrimination from other sources of disparity by controlling for
legal non-discretionary factors through regression analysis. The vari-
ability in the likelihood of arrest that is explained by features such
as victim and offender’s race is then interpreted as (potentially) re-
sulting from discriminatory practices. These analyses are inherently
limited by the extent to which available data capture all alternative
explanatory factors, and the challenge of interpreting race as a causal
or mediating factor in regression [117]. Research in this area has
primarily relied on three sources of data: (i) field observations of
encounters between police officers and citizens; (ii) self-reports of
offending behavior; (iii) and official crime incidents records reported
On the Validity of Arrest as a Proxy for Offense
AIES ’21, May 19–21, 2021, Virtual Event, USA.
by police agencies. We focus here on (iii), as it is most closely re-
lated to our work. Prior studies of single victim, single offender
incidents in the NIBRS data found that robberies, simple assault,
aggravated assaults were more likely to be cleared by arrest when
the offender is White than when the offender is Black, even after
adjusting for many contextual and situational factors of the incident
[25, 96, 99]. These three types of offenses constitute the majority
of violent crimes reported to police. This association did not persist
for the most serious violent crimes of forcible rape and murder/non-
negligent manslaughter. In their analysis of rape offenses, D’Alessio
and Stolzenberg [25] found that the overall clearance rate for Black
offenders was marginally higher than for Whites, but that there was
no statistically significant difference after controlling for situational
factors. Through survival analysis modeling, Roberts and Lyons
[99] found that murder/non-negligent manslaughter incidents with
non-White offenders were more likely to result in an arrest. Lastly,
in a recent analysis of violent offenses of 2003–2012 NIBRS data in-
cluding crimes committed by multiple offenders, Lantz and Wenger
[78] found that incidents were less likely to result in arrests when
the offender was Black. However, when they restricted to incidents
where Black and White individuals offended together, they found
that Black offenders were slightly more likely to be arrested. Based
on this evidence, the authors argued that omitted variable bias might
affect regression analyses conducted on NIBRS data. Our study of
violent offenses on NIBRS is closely related to that of D’Alessio
and Stolzenberg [25], but our analysis is much larger scale, includes
incidents of murder/non-negligent manslaughter, and, unlike theirs,
does not rely on the (unrealistic) assumption that the regression
model is well-specified. Unlike Lantz and Wenger [78], we focus
specifically on geographical variations in the likelihood of arrest and
on the issue of model misspecification. We find that the sign of the
offender race coefficient varies with the subset of crimes used in
the analysis, which suggests that the conclusions of prior work are
dependent on model specification.
3
DATA
Our analysis is mainly based on incident-level data of offenses from
the National Incidents Based Reporting System (NIBRS) and data
of police agencies from the Law Enforcement Employees Report.
We describe each of the two datasets in turn.
NIBRS data. NIBRS is part of the FBI’s Uniform Crime Report-
ing (UCR) program. Through NIBRS, law enforcement agencies
submit detailed data on the characteristics of incidents that are known
to them, such as the demographics of victims and offenders [90].
In our analysis, we use incident-level data of offenses and arrests
recorded in NIBRS between 2007 and 2016 by aggregating annual
data files obtained from the Inter-University Consortium for Political
and Social Research (ICPSR) [32, 34, 36, 38, 40, 42, 44, 46, 48, 50].
We only consider incidents that include at least one offense of
murder/non-negligent manslaughter, forcible rape, robbery, aggra-
vated assault, or simple assault.
In order to conduct our statistical analysis, we process the data
as follows. First, we keep only data from the 16 states that submit-
ted all their crime data through NIBRS in 2014: Arkansas (AR),
Colorado (CO), Delaware (DE), Idaho (ID), Iowa (IA), Kentucky
(KY), Michigan (MI), Montana (MT), New Hampshire (NH), North
Dakota (ND), South Carolina (SC), South Dakota (SD), Tennessee
(TN), Vermont (VT), Virginia (VA), and West Virginia (WV). Our
results may not generalize beyond these 16 states. Second, following
the approach of D’Alessio and Stolzenberg [25], we keep only inci-
dents that involve only one offender and one victim. The exclusion
of incidents with multiple victims or offenders is mainly motivated
by the additional assumptions that would be required if these types
of incidents were considered for the analysis. Since data from NI-
BRS do not contain offender-level characteristics on the incident
(e.g., which offender used the weapon), an analysis of multi-offender
crimes would need to rely on assumptions around the circumstances
of the incidents and require more complex regression models, e.g.,
the dependence of observations corresponding to the same incident
should be modeled. By excluding these incidents, the analysis of
the interactions between victims’ and offenders’ relevant features is
simplified. Importantly, we consider only incidents where both the
victim’s and offender’s races are recorded as either Black or White.
We cannot exclude Hispanics from the analysis because the ethnicity
field was introduced in the data only in 2012 and is often left empty.
We note that almost every victim of Hispanic ethnicity is recorded
as being White. Lastly, we drop all incidents that are cleared by
exceptional means. We discuss this type of clearance in Appendix A.
The final dataset includes 9,181 incidents of murder/non-negligent
manslaughter, 103,309 forcible rapes, 101,133 robberies, 596,324
aggravated assaults, and 2,669,399 simple assaults.
For the regression analysis, we transform the features (a.k.a. co-
variates, regressors, independent variables) as follows. We first code
dummies corresponding to the age, sex, and race of victim and of-
fender. We create victim-level dummy variables to indicate whether
the victim suffered a serious or a minor injury, knew the offender
(i.e., the offender was not unknown to victim or was a stranger), and
whether the incident occurred in the residence of the victim. We
also create binary variables for incident’s characteristics to indicate
whether the incident occurred during the day (i.e., between 7am and
8pm), a firearm was involved, a weapon other than a firearm was
involved, the offense was only attempted but not completed (only
available for forcible rape and robbery), the offender was suspected
of having used drugs or alcohol, and whether ancillary offenses
were committed. Finally, we create a variable that corresponds to
the share of Black violent offenders (out of all violent offenders) for
each police agency and a series of dummy variables for states and
years to capture state and year fixed effects.
Law enforcement data. We match data from NIBRS with infor-
mation regarding the police agency from the Law Enforcement
Employees Report. This data are obtained from ICSPR for the years
2007–2016 [33, 35, 37, 39, 41, 43, 45, 47, 49, 51]. For each police
agency we extract information on the total population served and the
number of police officers employed.
4
METHODOLOGY
Throughout the analysis, we assume the observations (i.e., the inci-
dents) to be independent. Although each observation corresponds
to a single crime incident and we exclude incidents that are cleared
by exceptional means, independence may be violated if multiple
incidents involved the same offender. Since offenders’ identifiers
AIES ’21, May 19–21, 2021, Virtual Event, USA.
Fogliato, Xiang, Lipton, Nagin, Chouldechova
are not available in the data, we are unable to model this potential
dependence.
In order to test for macro-level variations in racial disparities
across geography, we split our data by jurisdiction (i.e., police
agency) and examine the arrest rates for different types of crimes
and demographics. In our analysis, the arrest rate corresponds to
the share of offenses that result in arrests. For example, the arrest
rate for White offenders is given by the ratio between the number of
arrests and the number of offenses involving White offenders. Such
summary statistics likely represent upper bounds for the arrest rates
in the entire population of crimes, i.e., also the crimes that are not
accounted for by our analysis such as those that are not reported
to law enforcement. We assess the correlation between variables
via Pearson’s correlation coefficient (𝜌). Statistical significance is
assessed at the 0.01 level for all hypothesis tests.
Since not all of the data features are fully observed, for our re-
gression analysis we need to carry out data imputation. The datasets
(one for each offense type) contain small shares of missing values
consisting of up to approximately 5% of all observations, with the
exception of around 20% in case of the offender’s age in offenses
of robbery. As in past work [25], we assume the data to be miss-
ing at random (MAR) [101]. We impute ten datasets via multiple
imputation by chained equations [4]. On each imputed dataset, we
use logistic regression to model the dependence of the likelihood
of arrest on race and other factors. We calculate sandwich standard
errors for the coefficients estimates. We then obtain a single set of
coefficients estimates and the corresponding standard errors using
the formulas provided by Rubin [102, pp. 76-77]. This analysis is
conducted separately for each offense type.
In the second stage of our analysis, we investigate whether the
logistic regression model appears to be well-specified. Here, we ap-
ply the approach proposed by Buja et al. [16], which is based on the
principle that coefficients estimates of a correctly specified model do
not change significantly as the distribution of the regressors varies.
Changes in the coefficients estimates under observation reweighting
are therefore indicative of model misspecification. In our analysis,
we employ the focal slope visual model diagnostic introduced by
Buja et al. [16] to assess how the offender’s race coefficient estimate
varies with the reweighting of the distribution of certain regressors.
This tool provides insights into the interactions between the race
variable and other regressors without modeling the interactions di-
rectly in the regression model. Our aim is to investigate whether the
estimate of the coefficient relative to the offender’s race always has
a consistent sign and magnitude under different reweightings.
To implement the reweighting procedure, we proceed as follows.
We first construct a grid of ten evenly spaced values for the numeric
features, and use the grid values of {0, 1} for the binary features.
For each feature, we split the observations into groups based on the
grid’s cell center that is closest to each observation’s feature value
in absolute distance. For each feature-grid cell pair, we then obtain
100 estimates of the logistic regression coefficients by bootstrap
resampling observations from the given group. Due to the high
computational cost driven by the large number of observations of
simple assault incidents, we apply the focal slope diagnostics to only
one of the ten imputed datasets for this offense type. The coefficients
estimates on the ten imputed datasets are nearly identical, so we do
not expect the focal slope analyses to vary with the imputed data
sample. Our data analysis is fully reproducible. The full R [110] code
is available at the following address: https://github.com/ricfog/on-
the-validity-of-arrest.
5
LIMITATIONS
Despite the wealth of information contained therein, analyses of
NIBRS data suffer from several key limitations. First, not every po-
lice agency reports all of its crime data through NIBRS [10]. These
omissions may reflect partial reporting (e.g., for some period of
time each year) or complete non-reporting by agencies in the states
considered. If such data omissions occurred at random (with respect
to crimes characteristics and outcomes), then our inference at the
level of the police agency would not be affected, but the represen-
tativeness of our sample with respect to the population of interest
(i.e., all the crime incidents known to police agencies in the 16 states
considered) could be impacted. Data omissions that do not occur at
random would be even more problematic. For example, the existence
of different reporting protocols across states or jurisdictions, such as
the non-reporting of incidents that do not result in arrest by certain
agencies, could explain the large variations in arrest rates that we
observe. Importantly, there is evidence that cases that are considered
as “unfounded” are not tracked by NIBRS [60] and consequently
will not be included in the data. Another issue pertains to the quality
of the data that are reported, which may not offer an unbiased picture
of the circumstances of the incident. Victims may report mistaken or
even false details regarding the incident. Likewise, data from police
departments may also be the artefact of a selection, manipulation,
and review process, as the study of Richardson et al. [98] has shown.
While in many instances the arrestee is the offender, there may be
incidents in the data that are cleared by wrongful arrests. Due to the
absence of data on which incidents might correspond to wrongful
arrests, we are unable to account for this possibility in our analy-
sis. This may be problematic given the evidence that, even for the
most serious types of offenses, wrongful arrests may represent a
considerable share of all arrests [81]. Our analysis considers only
violent crime incidents that are not cleared by exceptional means and
where there is a lone offender and victim whose race is reported as
either Black or White. Some of the conclusions may therefore fail to
generalise to other types of incidents. It is important to keep in mind
that the characteristics of the sample of offenses in NIBRS is not
representative of all crimes at the national level [84, 93]. Lastly, we
could not exclude Hispanics from our sample, nor could we code this
group separately for our analysis. There is evidence that the degree
of involvement in violent offending of Hispanics falls within the
levels of the White and of the Black populations [106]. As previously
mentioned, in NIBRS data Hispanics are for the most part included
within the White population. Any existing differences in offending
behavior or arrest rates between Hispanic and non-Hispanic White
offenders will not be captured by our analysis.
6
RESULTS
Since, to the best of our knowledge, this study presents the first
analysis of racial disparities in violent offenses using the most recent
years of NIBRS data, we begin by providing some summary statistics
on arrest rates across victim and offender’s demographics and crime
types (see also Table 1). Overall, 41% of all offenders and 34% of
On the Validity of Arrest as a Proxy for Offense
AIES ’21, May 19–21, 2021, Virtual Event, USA.
all victims are Black. As a reminder, only Black and White individu-
als are represented in the dataset. The overrepresentation of Black
individuals among offenders is lowest in case of incidents of forcible
rape (31%) and highest in case of robbery (76%). We then examine
the likelihood of arrest across offenders’ racial groups. Arrests are
more frequent in case of incidents involving White offenders across
all types of crimes (overall, 56% for White vs. 42% for Black offend-
ers). However, there exist differences in the gap in arrest rates across
types of offenses. The gap is largest in case of robbery (36% vs 19%)
and aggravated assault (62% vs 44%), followed by simple assault
(57% vs 43%), which constitute the majority of the offenses present
in the data. In contrast, the gap is small for murder/non-negligent
manslaughter (73% vs 67%) and rape (27% vs 25%). Lastly, we
assess the racial composition of victims. Intraracial crimes constitute
four-fifths or more of the offenses across all types of crimes, with the
exception of rape (63%) and robbery (57%) offenses committed by
Black offenders. Interestingly, arrest rates for interracial crimes are
similar across racial groups (within 2%) for all types of crimes other
than robbery. In summary, we observe that arrest rates are highest for
intraracial offenses among Whites, followed by interracial offenses,
and last by intraracial offenses among Black individuals.
6.1
Macro-level variations in arrest rates
It is possible that the observed gap in arrest rates across offenders’
racial groups could be explained by variations in the likelihood of
arrest and in the racial composition of offenders across geographical
areas, e.g., as in case of a Simpson’s paradox. To analyse such
variation, we first consider the data regarding simple assaults. The
large size of this dataset allows us to consider arrest rates at the
level of the cities and police agencies. For this analysis, we focus on
police agencies that reported at least 100 crimes of simple assault in
the ten-year period spanned by our data.
We start by decomposing the gap in arrest rates between White
and Black offenders (13%=57%-43%) into state-level differences,
which are represented by the green stars in Figure 1. Two notable
patterns are worth mentioning. First, there are quite large variations
in arrest rates across states. While in Arkansas less than 35% of
all offenses resulted in the arrest of the offender, in Delaware and
Vermont 79% and 82% did respectively. Second, we observe that
the gap in arrest rates between Black and White offenders varies
substantially across states. Although White offenders were arrested
at higher rates than Black offenders in almost all of the states consid-
ered, the pooled mean of the gap in arrest rates is 6% (std.dev.=6%)
and thus it is smaller than the overall gap. It is possible, as we shall
show, that variations in arrest rates across police agencies within
may drive the observed disparities. We first focus our analysis on
three states with large disparities, including Tennessee (state-level
gap=20%), Michigan (14%), and South Carolina (10%), and then
turn to the other states.
Let’s first consider the case of Tennessee. Our dataset contains
approximately 500,000 offenses of simple assault that occurred in
the state during the period considered. Tennessee contains two large
cities, Memphis and Nashville. In Memphis, 26% of the offenses
resulted in an arrest and 89% of the offenders were identified as
Black. In contrast, in Nashville and its metropolitan area the arrest
rate is 54% and only 57% of the offenders were Black. Although
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
MT
ID
CO
AR
TN
KY
WV
VA
SC
DE
SD
ND
IA
MI
VT
NH
State code
Difference in arrest rates between
white and black offenders
Figure 1: Analysis of racial disparities in arrest rates at the level of the states
and law enforcement agencies. The green stars indicate state-level observed
differences in the rates of arrest for simple assaults between White and Black
offenders in the data from NIBRS considered. For example, in Tennessee
(TN), the arrest rate is 20% higher for White offenders than for Black offend-
ers. States are colored and grouped according to the corresponding Census
region. The boxplots represent the distribution of the gap in arrest rates across
police agencies with at least 50 Black and White offenders. The lower and
upper hinges correspond to the first and third quartiles. The upper whiskers
extend to the largest value no further than 1.5 times the interquantile range
from the hinge.
Black and White offenders were arrested at similar rates within
each of the two areas, the aggregate gap in arrest rates between
racial groups is 15%. Furthermore, data on offenses in Memphis
alone accounts for 51% of all incidents involving Black offenders in
the state. By contrast, only 5% of all crimes with White offenders
occurred in Memphis. Even if arrest rates largely vary across the
14 core cities, the gap across racial groups, within each city, is
always small (mean=4%, std.dev.=3%). Thus, the low arrest rate in
Memphis, together with the fact that most of the offenses committed
by Black offenders occur in this city, drives the the observed state-
level disparity in arrest rates.
Similar findings hold in the case of Michigan. Data from the city
of Detroit contain 17% of the almost 600,000 simple assault offenses
in the state but also account for 36% of all incidents involving Black
offenders in the state, compared to only 2% of those with White
offenders. White and Black offenders were arrested at similar rates
within the city. Since arrest rates in this area are considerably lower
than in the rest of the state (20% vs 43%), the overall disparity in
arrest rates at the state level is large. The case of South Carolina is
slightly more complex. For this state we do not observe large dif-
ferences in arrest rates between core cities and surrounding regions
and there is no variation in the size of racial disparities in arrest
rates, which are large in both areas. However, we observe that police
agencies in areas where larger shares of offenders are Black also
tend to have lower rates of arrest (𝜌= −0.32).
We then study whether the disparities in arrest rates persist at the
level of the police agency for the other states considered. Figure 1
shows the boxplots of the differences in arrest rates between White
and Black offenders for the police agencies in each state. We ob-
serve that the median gap in arrest rates for the police agencies is
generally smaller than the difference at the state level. This pattern is
consistent with the aforementioned heterogeneity in arrest rates and
distributions of the Black and White populations of offenders across
jurisdictions. Interestingly, however, even after conditioning on the
police agency, there still remains some degree of variation in the gap
AIES ’21, May 19–21, 2021, Virtual Event, USA.
Fogliato, Xiang, Lipton, Nagin, Chouldechova
in arrest rates across racial groups, with arrest rates generally being
higher for White offenders.
By focusing on the characteristics of the law enforcement agency,
we find that in most states agencies with larger shares of Black
offenders tend to have, as in the case of South Carolina, lower arrest
rates (𝜌= −0.29), higher crime rates in their jurisdictions (𝜌= 0.37),
more officers per capita (𝜌= 0.17), and larger populations served
(𝜌= 0.18). However, the number of officers per incident is not
linearly associated with the share of offenders that is Black in the
jurisdiction (𝜌= −0.02, p-value= 0.34).
We briefly turn our attention to the other four types of offenses.
Simple assault is the least serious crime among the ones that we
considered, so ex ante it is unclear whether the findings would gen-
eralize to the other crimes. Based on our analysis, we can categorize
the offenses in two groups. The first includes aggravated assault and
robbery. For these two types of crimes, the results are similar to
those that we have described above and, more specifically, arrest
rates are higher for White offenders in almost all of the states con-
sidered (Figure 2). The pooled means of the state-level gaps in arrest
rates between White and Black offenders for aggravated assault and
robbery are 6% and 11% respectively. Still, we need to keep in mind
that the magnitude of arrest rates for these two types of offenses is
very different: While almost two in three offenders were arrested for
aggravated assault (pooled mean=63%), only one in three reported
offenses of robbery resulted in arrest (35%). Large differences in
arrest rates across offense types persist even if incidents with multi-
ple victims and offenders are accounted for. For crimes of rape and
murder, both the aggregate and state-level differences in arrest rates
across racial groups are small (average state-level diff.=2% for both
types of offenses). Overall arrest rates are low across all states for
rape (pooled mean=29%) and high for murder (mean=73%).
Although these results cannot explain why the observed differ-
ences in arrest rates across offenders’ racial groups arise and why the
appear only for assaults and robberies, they show that the magnitude
of disparities can be explained by the existing large variations in the
likelihood of arrest across jurisdictions and by the fact that agencies
with larger shares of Black offenders have lower arrest rates overall.
We discuss two potential explanations for these findings in §7.
6.2
Regression analysis
In this section, we investigate whether the observed differences in
arrest rates across racial groups can be explained by the incident’s
characteristics. For this purpose, we model the likelihood of arrest
as a function of contextual and situational factors, fitting separate lo-
gistic regression models for each of the five types of violent offenses
as described in §4. As a reminder, among the regressors, we include
victim and offender’s demographics, the victim-offender relation-
ship prior to the incident, circumstances (e.g., location and time of
the day) and other characteristics (e.g., presence of weapon) of the
incident, information regarding the police agency where the inci-
dent was recorded (police officers per capita, population served, and
share of Black offenders), and the state in which the crime occurred.
The full set of regressors and coefficients estimates is presented in
Table 2.
Consistent with the high-level findings of our macro-level analy-
sis, our estimate of the coefficient of White offender race (vs. Black)
is positive and statistically significant in case of aggravated assault,
simple assault, and robbery (0.03, 0.04, 0.24 respectively), and not
statistically significant for forcible rape and murder (0.04 and −0.2
respectively). However, note that the coefficients estimates in case
of assault, despite being statistically significant, are close to zero.
The coefficient of White victim race is statistically significant and
negative for forcible rape (−0.11), and positive for aggravated and
simple assault (0.07 and 0.09 respectively). It is not statistically sig-
nificant for murder/non-negligent manslaughter and robbery (−0.02
and 0.03 respectively).2
If the model were correctly specified, we could interpret the
coefficient as the log of the odds ratio of the likelihood of arrest
for a White offender compared to a Black offender, conditional on
all other regressors. Our model would then indicate that, ceteris
paribus, an arrest is more likely for a White offender compared
to a Black offender for assaults and robbery, but not for murder
and rape. Furthermore, incidents involving White victims would
be, ceteris paribus, less likely to result in an arrest for offenses of
rape, but more likely in case of aggravated and simple assault. The
conditional likelihood of arrest does not considerably differ across
racial groups for murder. Note again that, even in the case of several
of the statistically significant coefficients, the coefficient estimates
themselves are generally small.
More realistically, our logistic regression model is misspecified
and thus such interpretations of the coefficients estimates are not
correct. In Figure 3, we present the results of the “focal slope” model
diagnostics for the offender’s race coefficient across all crimes other
than murder/non-negligent manslaughter, which we omitted due to
the small sample size. We observe that the estimates of this coeffi-
cient vary with the distribution of the regressors, thereby indicating
that none of the regression models is well specified. Interestingly, we
observe that the association of the offender’s race (White=1) with
the outcome is typically positive for incidents with White victims,
but is weaker or even negative in case of Black victims. This result
would seem to suggest the presence of an interaction between vic-
tim’s and offender’s race. In case of rape and simple assaults with
Black victims, the offender being White appears to be associated
with a decrease in the likelihood of arrest. Jurisdiction-level factors
also appear to impact the estimates of the offender race coefficient.
For example, in case of assaults, we observe a weak or even negative
association between the race variable and the outcome in police
agencies where offenders mainly belong to one racial group, but a
positive association in agencies where the racial composition of of-
fenders is more diverse. We observe that the association between the
offender’s race and arrest is positive and strong only for middle-aged
offenders, and is weak for both young and old offenders. Overall, the
results indicate that no causal conclusions can be drawn regarding
the “effect” of race from such a model. Furthermore, problematically,
the findings around the size of the effect are contingent upon the
areas and types of crimes that are considered.
2We conducted two additional checks. First, we fitted logistic mixed model with random
effects for law enforcement agencies [53]. The estimates of the race coefficients were
very close to those of the regression model that we present in the main analysis. Second,
we clustered the sandwich standard errors [56] by law enforcement agency and year. The
resulting coefficients estimates relative to the offender’s race was statistically significant
in case of simple assaults, but not for aggravated assaults.
On the Validity of Arrest as a Proxy for Offense
AIES ’21, May 19–21, 2021, Virtual Event, USA.
Finally, although our emphasis was primarily on the coefficient
of race, one should note that most of the coefficient estimates for the
other features are statistically significant and many are much larger
than those corresponding to race. This indicates that incidents of the
same offense type might result in different outcomes.
7
DISCUSSION
Our investigation of NIBRS data, which centered on race as a predic-
tor of the likelihood of arrest for violent crimes, was motivated by the
implications concerning the potential disconnect between re-offense
and re-arrest in RAIs. We presented two key findings. First, in our
analysis White offenders were more likely to be arrested than Black
offenders for crimes of robbery and assaults, but not for forcible
rape and murder/non-negligent manslaughter. The finding that arrest
rates in the NIBRS are higher for White offenders than for Black
offenders was also noted by D’Alessio and Stolzenberg [25]. The
observed disparities in our study are largely explained by variations
in arrest rates across jurisdictions. Yet, even after conditioning on
the individual law enforcement agency, some of these disparities
persisted. Second, while our initial regression results indicated that
the magnitude of the offender race coefficients estimates were fairly
small compared to those of other predictors, the model diagnostics
revealed that their sign and magnitude varied with the sample of
offenses that was considered. Despite the misspecification of our
regression model, it seems unlikely that crime characteristics that we
took into account could fully explain the observed variations or even
the racial disparities in arrest rates. Our results call into question the
reliability of arrest as a proxy for offense.
Arrest rates and racial disparities vary considerably across juris-
dictions. In our study we also found that the observed racial disparity
in arrest rates can be attributed to lower arrest rates in police agencies
with larger shares of Black offenders. This finding is aligned with
several hypotheses from the criminology literature, two of which we
discuss below.
The first explanation builds off of the hypothesis of benign neglect,
which posits that the effort invested by police into the investigation
of the crimes might be proportional to the perception of the victim’s
deservedness. A perspective of victim devaluing, which is more
likely to prevail in disadvantaged neighborhoods or cities, might,
in combination with resource constraints, lead to systematically
lower investigation effort devoted to incidents occurring in those
areas [105]. In particular, police departments might allocate their
limited resources only to certain communities and to solving the
most serious incidents [75], such as rape and murder, for which
police officers are granted less discretion. Police might also be more
likely to tolerate criminal acts in areas where crimes rates are higher
[75, 105] or that are racially segregated [71]. It would then be hard
for victims and residents in these areas to be heard by the police and
to legitimate their complaints. Consistent with Black’s stratification
hypothesis [11], which posits a positive relationship between the
likelihood of arrest and the gap in social status of victim and of-
fender, this explanation is partially supported by our finding that the
association between the probability of arrest and the offender White
race is weaker or negative for incidents involving Black victims. By
contrast, the investigation of crimes of murder and rape would be
less affected by the differential allocation of policing resources. It
is possible that the results for murder incidents may reflect a shift
in racial discrimination from a victim- to an offender-centered per-
spective: Murders are the most serious form of crime and as such
they attract considerable attention from the media, community, and
police agencies. In addition, the evaluation of performance based ex-
clusively on the clearance rate represents an incentive for homicide
detectives to solve all cases to which they are assigned [97].
A second hypothesis is that the observed racial disparities are
an artefact of variations in the community’s willingness to rely and
cooperate with the police. In the case of violent crimes, the co-
operation of victims and onlookers with law enforcement is often
necessary for identifying the suspect and clearing the crime. Cer-
tain communities have lower levels of trust in law enforcement—a
phenomenon known as legal cynicism—and consequently are less
likely to assist police officers in their investigations. For example,
social norms can amplify negative attitudes towards the police by
incentivizing the resolution of conflicts without seeking help from
members outside the community [2] or by fostering a “stop snitch-
ing” culture [21]. Community members may also fear retaliation if
they decide cooperate with the police [77]. There is considerable
evidence that cooperation varies with these types of (sub)cultural
factors [18, 72, 109, 113, 114]. Phenomena that erode trust, such
as police misconduct [68, 111] and over-policing [69] (e.g., street
stops) are more frequent in predominantly-Black areas. Consistently,
many studies have found Black individuals to hold more negative
views of law enforcement [120–122]. Differential cooperation has
been a central theme in prior work on racial disparities in arrests for
homicides [30, 97]. Unfortunately, one clear limitation of NIBRS
data is that they do not include incident-level details on cooperation,
as also Roberts and Roberts [100] noted in their recent study. The
only piece of information that is available, and that has been anal-
ysed by recent work on violent offenses, is whether the incident is
exceptionally cleared because of the lack of victim’s cooperation
[52]. In our dataset, however, the share of incidents that were cleared
for this reason did not differ across racial groups of offenders and
victims (see Appendix A).
The two hypotheses should not be seen as a dichotomy: Each
of them may explain, at least in part, the observed disparities in
the probability of arrest. At the same time, it also seems certainly
possible that these disparities could be explained by differences
in the ways in which crimes are recorded across law enforcement
agencies or by different legal standards used to evaluate whether
an arrest needs to be made. For example, in the case of intimate
partner violence (a.k.a. IPV), once the incident is reported to the
police, prevailing mandatory arrest laws in certain jurisdictions leave
officers with little discretion as to whether to arrest the reported
offender [28, 64, 76]. This phenomenon might partially explain the
variation observed in arrest rates for simple assaults, which include
some IPV offenses, across states.
Reporting a single estimate of the coefficient of the offender’s
race may be misleading. Our focal slope model diagnostics of the lo-
gistic regression revealed that the association between the offender’s
race and the likelihood of arrest largely depended on the sample
of offenses that was considered. This result is important for two
reasons. First, it demonstrates that the regression model employed
in our analysis is not well-specified. In past studies, researchers
AIES ’21, May 19–21, 2021, Virtual Event, USA.
Fogliato, Xiang, Lipton, Nagin, Chouldechova
typically postulated a model, fitted it on the data, and then reported
the estimates of the coefficients of interests, such as those of the
offender’s or victim’s races. The models used in these works were
often similar to ours. For example, D’Alessio and Stolzenberg [25]
employed a logistic regression that accounted for a subset of the pre-
dictors that were included in our model. The focal slope diagnostics
in our analysis, which are based on the recent work of Buja et al.
[16], have shown that reporting one single coefficients estimate may
not be very informative when the modeling assumptions do not hold.
Researchers should, instead, analyse how the misspecification of the
regression model that they chose may call into question their interpre-
tations of the results, e.g., by using the types of diagnostics proposed
by Buja et al. [16]. Second, the diagnostics have revealed that, after
controlling for crimes characteristics, the association between the
likelihood of arrest and the offender’s race depended on the race
of the victim. We also observed a weaker association between the
offender’s race and the likelihood of arrest in police agencies with
larger shares of White offenders. While a careful analysis of the role
of race as a predictor of the likelihood of arrest across each subpop-
ulation (e.g., different jurisdictions) is challenging and outside of
the scope of our work, the main takeaway from our results is that
the likelihood of arrest can differ across races, both at the aggregate
level and conditionally on other factors.
Arrest is a biased proxy of offense. In §1, we discussed how prior
studies have found that the racial composition of arrestees in the
Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) roughly match that of offenders in
the National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) data, a criminal
victimization survey based on a nationally representative sample of
households, for the four types of violent crime measured by both pro-
grams. This pattern suggests that the likelihood of arrest for White
and Black offenders is, on average, similar, but it does not indicate
that the likelihood of arrest is equal for all offenders in the two racial
groups. We have found that arrest rates and racial disparities vary
across states and jurisdictions. The regression analysis has further
revealed that, even after conditioning on relevant features, the dispar-
ities across racial groups still persist and run in different directions
depending on these features. Thus, the extent to which arrest re-
flects offending behavior depends on the geographical area where
the crime occurs, the offenders’ and victims’ demographics, and
other crimes characteristics. Treating arrests as an unbiased, or even
racially-unbiased, measure of violent offending fails to acknowledge
the existing heterogeneity in the likelihood of arrest.
8
IMPLICATIONS FOR RAIS
Risk of re-arrest and re-offense may diverge, even in case of
violent offenses. Our analysis has shown that arrests are not a ran-
dom sample of all violent offenses known to police agencies as
reflected in NIBRS data. The large variations that we observe in ar-
rest rates across crime types and jurisdictions are deeply problematic
for RAIs.3 As an example, let’s revisit our analysis of Tennessee’s of-
fense and arrest data. In Nashville, half of all simple assault offenses
3We acknowledge that availability of information regarding the offender and victim
might influence the likelihood of arrest differently across crime types. However, the
observed variation persisted even once we considered all incidents in the data, i.e., we
only applied the data restrictions relative the states. The arrest rates for murder, forcible
rape, robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault were 58%, 24%, 24%, 50%, and
50% respectively.
resulted in arrests, as compared to only one fourth in Memphis. We
should expect these differences to be reflected in the prevalence of
re-arrests in the data used to train and assess RAIs. The variation
in the characteristics of the offender populations would then shape
the predictors used to construct the RAI. Consequently, we should
expect RAIs trained on re-arrest data to underestimate the risk of re-
offense for certain subpopulations of defendants—specifically, those
that are more prevalent in the city with lower arrest rates, and to be
poorly calibrated with respect to re-offense data. Moreover, if the risk
factors employed by the RAI cannot explain the disparities observed
between the two cities, the instrument will also exhibit differences in
its calibration properties on re-arrest data across the two cities. Ab-
sent knowledge of the functional dependency between re-arrest and
re-offense, practitioners might try to mitigate the predictive biases
of the RAI using only re-arrest data, only inadvertently (potentially)
exacerbating the bias as measured with respect to re-offense. To
overcome this issue, individual jurisdictions could construct their
own RAIs. However, in most cases this is certainly not possible due
to data unavailability and other limitations.
As a second example, consider the variation in arrest rates across
types of offenses. If the propensity to commit different types of vio-
lent crime were to differ across offenders, then the risk of re-arrest
would be lower for certain individuals, even if their risk of re-offense
were identical. For instance, since arrests for rape are rare (as is gen-
erally true for sex offenses), RAIs might erroneously underestimate
the risk of these sex offenders recidivating (compared to, say, aggra-
vated assault offenders), and could nudge nudge decision-makers
toward more lenient treatment that is unwarranted on the basis of un-
derlying re-offense risk. In order to identify defendants at high risk
of recidivism, practitioners should design RAIs that either account
for this bias or that target only the particular type of crime of interest.
We note that there already exist tools that predict specifically the
likelihood of future IPV [85].
The consequences of the sampling bias in arrest data are not
limited to mismeasurement of re-arrest outcomes on which RAIs
are trained. This bias affects offenders’ criminal histories as well,
making them inaccurate reflections of past offending behavior. The
number of prior arrests represents an underestimation of the total
number of prior offenses, especially for frequent offenders, who
are generally less likely to be arrested [13]. Similarly, our analysis
has shown that certain types of crimes are more likely to result
in arrest, and thus the characteristics of the crimes recorded in a
defendant’s prior criminal history do not offer an unbiased picture
of the characteristics of the prior offenses that they actually have
committed. Lastly, the sample of arrestees does not reflect the sample
of offenders in the population. In particular, more frequent offenders
may be less likely to be caught for each individual crime that they
commit, yet more likely to be represented among arrestees, e.g., see
the phenomenon of “stochastic selectivity” described by Canela-
Cacho et al. [17].
Bias cannot be estimated from NIBRS data alone. NIBRS is the
main program of crime data collection in the US, providing the best
available unified view of crime trends. Large-scale analyses of racial
disparities could leverage the NIBRS because of its comprehensive-
ness. However, for the purpose of mitigating bias in criminal RAIs,
On the Validity of Arrest as a Proxy for Offense
AIES ’21, May 19–21, 2021, Virtual Event, USA.
NIBRS data alone are not sufficient for at least two key reasons,
which we discuss below.
First, the effect of many types of sampling biases cannot be identi-
fied from the observed data. In the discussion, we have hypothesized
that variations in the likelihood of arrest might stem from multiple
sources, namely the allocation of policing resources, community’s
cooperation, and ways in which the crimes are recorded. However, it
is also clear that some of the differences in arrest rates across crimes
are inherently tied to the difficulty of identifying and arresting the
offender. For example, crime incidents in which the offender is a
stranger to the victim are cleared at lower rates across all crime types
(Table 2). Many of these factors are not represented in NIBRS data,
which offers only a limited window into the reason why a reported
offense did not result in arrest (e.g., for exceptional clearances). In
addition, NIBRS data only include crime incidents that are known to
law enforcement, which represent only a small share of the offenses
that are committed. According to estimates from the National Crime
Victimization Survey (NCVS), in 2019 only about two in five violent
victimizations were reported to the police [87]. Evidence suggests
that rates of crime reporting substantially vary across crime types [7]
and are generally higher in case of incidents involving Black victims,
even if cooperation rates may be lower [126]. Thus, the information
present in NIBRS data would not be sufficient to implement tailored
“debiasing” approaches that target specific types of bias in the dat
(e.g., a certain discriminatory proactive policing strategy) and that
may be necessary from a legal perspective [65]. One could, however,
attempt to leverage NIBRS together with richer datasets of police
records, of self-reported offending behavior, data from NCVS, and
of citizen-police interactions such as those studied in Terrill and
Reisig [111]. Kochel et al. [76] and Lytle [83] offer interesting ex-
amples of meta-analyses on the role of race in arrests for different
types of crime types and data. An additional potential limitation
is the issue of model misspecification that we encountered in our
analysis. Clearly, regression models more complex than the ones that
we employed that could potentially address this issue, but they may
be harder to interpret and sanity-check as corrective mechanisms.
It is important to keep such trade-offs in mind when considering
model-based bias mitigation strategies.
Second, static estimates of the sampling bias may not be valid for
longitudinal outcomes. Due to the longitudinal nature of the measure-
ment of re-arrest outcomes on which RAIs are trained and assessed,
knowledge of the offending frequency and of the characteristics of
the crimes committed would be needed for the correction. Data from
NIBRS do not contain offenders’ identifiers and thus cannot provide
such estimates. However, offending behavior has been studied by
criminologists by surveying inmates and through longitudinal stud-
ies for decades. M ost studies agree that the offending frequency
varies across populations and, while most of the offenders commit
only a few crimes a year [95], there is a small group of offenders
with very high offending rates (more than 100 crimes a year) for
whom the probability of arrest is low [13]. Attempts to correct for
bias could then draw on these findings.
We remark that the utility of data from NIBRS for the estimation
of sampling bias in RAIs seems fairly limited. Alternative sources
of data, as discussed above, may provide more promising avenues
to bias mitigation. However, what is gained in specificity with al-
ternative data sources often comes at the cost of generalizability.
For example, data on self-reported offending behavior has mainly
been collected for populations of youths living in certain geographi-
cal regions, such as the Pathways to Desistance longitudinal study
conducted on young adolescents in Philadelphia (Pennsylvania) and
Maricopa county (Arizona) [15]. Extrapolation of findings on these
samples to other populations, such as offenders that are older or in
other geographical areas, would need to be carefully considered.
9
CONCLUSIONS
Characterizing the biases present in arrest data is critical to assessing
the challenges and opportunities posed by recidivism risk assess-
ment instruments. While past work has suggested evaluating RAIs
on data of violent offenses as a way to alleviate concerns of racial
bias, by analyzing incident-level crime data from NIBRS, we have
shown that violent offense data suffer from significant sampling
biases. There are disparities in the probability of arrest across geo-
graphical areas, characteristics of the crimes, and racial groups of
victims and offenders, that were not adequately captured in prior
work. Our analysis indicates that arrest data on violent crimes are
not a random sample of the offenses actually committed. Absent
corrective mechanisms, the predictions produced by RAIs trained
on such data can be expected to reflect these sampling biases. At
the same time, correcting for the sampling bias in recorded arrest
data without accounting for the complex relationship between race,
offending, and arrest may exacerbate the disparities exhibited by
the RAI. In the present work we have sought to highlight several of
the key complexities and challenges of identifying the magnitude
of sampling bias in arrest data. We also discussed the limitations
and challenges of using various sources of offending and arrest data
in bias mitigation efforts. Despite these challenges, we believe it is
important for future work on developing and de-biasing recidivism
risk assessment instruments to explicitly consider the discrepancy
between criminal offending and arrest.
10
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to the Partnership on AI (PAI) and the Carnegie
Mellon University Digital Transformation and Innovation Center
sponsored by PwC for funding this research. We also thank Arun
Kumar Kuchibhotla and anonymous reviewers for providing valuable
feedback.
REFERENCES
[1] Alekh Agarwal, Alina Beygelzimer, Miroslav Dudík, John Langford, and Hanna
Wallach. 2018. A reductions approach to fair classification. In International
Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 60–69.
[2] Elijah Anderson. 2000. Code of the street: Decency, violence, and the moral life
of the inner city. WW Norton & Company.
[3] Julia Angwin, Jeff Larson, Surya Mattu, and Lauren Kirchner. 2016. Machine
Bias: There’s Software Used Across the Country to Predict Future Criminals. And
it’s Biased Against Blacks. (2016). https://www.propublica.org/article/machine-
bias-risk-assessments-in-criminal-sentencing.
[4] Melissa J Azur, Elizabeth A Stuart, Constantine Frangakis, and Philip J Leaf.
2011. Multiple imputation by chained equations: what is it and how does it work?
International journal of methods in psychiatric research 20, 1 (2011), 40–49.
[5] Chelsea Barabas, Madars Virza, Karthik Dinakar, Joichi Ito, and Jonathan Zittrain.
2018. Interventions over predictions: Reframing the ethical debate for actuarial
risk assessment. In Conference on Fairness, Accountability and Transparency.
PMLR, 62–76.
[6] Douglas Bates, Martin Mächler, Ben Bolker, and Steve Walker. 2015. Fitting
Linear Mixed-Effects Models Using lme4. Journal of Statistical Software 67, 1
(2015), 1–48. https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v067.i01
AIES ’21, May 19–21, 2021, Virtual Event, USA.
Fogliato, Xiang, Lipton, Nagin, Chouldechova
[7] Eric P Baumer and Janet L Lauritsen. 2010. Reporting crime to the police,
1973–2005: A multivariate analysis of long-term trends in the National Crime
Survey (NCS) and National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS). Criminology
48, 1 (2010), 131–185.
[8] Allen J Beck and Alfred Blumstein. 2018. Racial disproportionality in US state
prisons: Accounting for the effects of racial and ethnic differences in crimi-
nal involvement, arrests, sentencing, and time served. Journal of Quantitative
Criminology 34, 3 (2018), 853–883.
[9] Richard Berk, Hoda Heidari, Shahin Jabbari, Matthew Joseph, Michael Kearns,
Jamie Morgenstern, Seth Neel, and Aaron Roth. 2017. A convex framework for
fair regression. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.02409 (2017).
[10] Daniel Bibel. 2015. Considerations and cautions regarding NIBRS data: A view
from the field. Justice Research and Policy 16, 2 (2015), 185–194.
[11] Donald Black. 1976. The behavior of law. New York: Academic Press.
[12] Hubert M Blalock. 1967. Toward a theory of minority-group relations. Vol. 325.
New York: Wiley.
[13] Alfred Blumstein, Jacqueline Cohen, Alex R Piquero, and Christy A Visher.
2010. Linking the crime and arrest processes to measure variations in individual
arrest risk per crime (Q). Journal of Quantitative Criminology 26, 4 (2010),
533–548.
[14] Marian J Borg and Karen F Parker. 2001. Mobilizing law in urban areas: The
social structure of homicide clearance rates. Law and Society Review (2001),
435–466.
[15] Robert Brame, Jeffrey Fagan, Alex R Piquero, Carol A Schubert, and Laurence
Steinberg. 2004. Criminal careers of serious delinquents in two cities. Youth
Violence and Juvenile Justice 2, 3 (2004), 256–272.
[16] Andreas Buja, Lawrence Brown, Arun Kumar Kuchibhotla, Richard Berk, Ed-
ward George, Linda Zhao, et al. 2019. Models as Approximations II: A Model-
Free Theory of Parametric Regression. Statist. Sci. 34, 4 (2019), 545–565.
[17] Jose A Canela-Cacho, Alfred Blumstein, and Jacqueline Cohen. 1997. Rela-
tionship between the offending frequency (𝜆) of imprisoned and free offenders.
Criminology 35, 1 (1997), 133–176.
[18] Patrick J Carr, Laura Napolitano, and Jessica Keating. 2007. We never call
the cops and here is why: A qualitative examination of legal cynicism in three
Philadelphia neighborhoods. Criminology 45, 2 (2007), 445–480.
[19] L Elisa Celis, Lingxiao Huang, Vijay Keswani, and Nisheeth K Vishnoi. 2019.
Classification with fairness constraints: A meta-algorithm with provable guar-
antees. In Proceedings of the conference on fairness, accountability, and trans-
parency. 319–328.
[20] Alexandra Chouldechova. 2017. Fair prediction with disparate impact: A study
of bias in recidivism prediction instruments. Big data 5, 2 (2017), 153–163.
[21] Susan Clampet-Lundquist, Patrick J Carr, and Maria J Kefalas. 2015. The sliding
scale of snitching: A qualitative examination of snitching in three Philadelphia
communities. In Sociological Forum, Vol. 30. Wiley Online Library, 265–285.
[22] Sam Corbett-Davies, Emma Pierson, Avi Feller, Sharad Goel, and Aziz Huq.
2017. Algorithmic decision making and the cost of fairness. In Proceedings of
the 23rd acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery and data
mining. 797–806.
[23] Gábor Csárdi. 2021. cli: Helpers for Developing Command Line Interfaces.
https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=cli R package version 2.3.0.
[24] David B. Dahl, David Scott, Charles Roosen, Arni Magnusson, and Jonathan
Swinton. 2019. xtable: Export Tables to LaTeX or HTML. https://CRAN.R-
project.org/package=xtable R package version 1.8-4.
[25] Stewart J D’Alessio and Lisa Stolzenberg. 2003. Race and the probability of
arrest. Social forces 81, 4 (2003), 1381–1397.
[26] William Dieterich, Christina Mendoza, and Tim Brennan. 2016. COMPAS Risk
Scales: Demonstrating Accuracy Equity and Predictive Parity. (2016).
[27] Michele Donini, Luca Oneto, Shai Ben-David, John Shawe-Taylor, and Massi-
miliano Pontil. 2018. Empirical risk minimization under fairness constraints.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.08626 (2018).
[28] Laura Dugan. 2003. Domestic violence legislation: Exploring its impact on the
likelihood of domestic violence, police involvement, and arrest. Criminology &
Public Policy 2, 2 (2003), 283–312.
[29] David Eitle, Stewart J D’Alessio, and Lisa Stolzenberg. 2002. Racial threat
and social control: A test of the political, economic, and threat of black crime
hypotheses. Social Forces 81, 2 (2002), 557–576.
[30] Jeffrey Fagan and Amanda Geller. 2018. Police, race, and the production of
capital homicides. Berkeley J. Crim. L. 23 (2018), 261.
[31] United States Department of Justice Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2004.
Uniform crime reporting handbook.
[32] United States Department of Justice Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2009.
National Incident-Based Reporting System, 2007. (2009). https://doi.org/10.
3886/ICPSR25113.v1
[33] United States Department of Justice Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2009.
Uniform Crime Reporting Program Data [United States]: Police Employee
(LEOKA) Data, 2007. (2009). https://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR25104.v1
[34] United States Department of Justice Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2010.
National Incident-Based Reporting System, 2008. (2010). https://doi.org/10.
3886/ICPSR27647.v1
[35] United States Department of Justice Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2010.
Uniform Crime Reporting Program Data [United States]: Police Employee
(LEOKA) Data, 2008. (2010). https://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR27646.v1
[36] United States Department of Justice Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2011.
Uniform Crime Reporting: National Incident-Based Reporting System, 2009.
(2011). https://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR30770.v1
[37] United States Department of Justice Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2011.
Uniform Crime Reporting Program Data [United States]: Police Employee
(LEOKA) Data, 2009. (2011). https://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR30765.v1
[38] United States Department of Justice Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2012.
Uniform Crime Reporting: National Incident-Based Reporting System, 2010.
(2012). https://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR33530.v1
[39] United States Department of Justice Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2012.
Uniform Crime Reporting Program Data: Police Employee (LEOKA) Data,
2010. (2012). https://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR33525.v1
[40] United States Department of Justice Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2013.
Uniform Crime Reporting Program Data: National Incident-Based Reporting
System, 2011. (2013). https://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR34585.v1
[41] United States Department of Justice Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2013.
Uniform Crime Reporting Program Data: Police Employee (LEOKA) Data,
2011. (2013). https://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR34584.v1
[42] United States Department of Justice Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2014.
Uniform Crime Reporting Program Data: National Incident-Based Reporting
System, 2012. (2014). https://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR35035.v1
[43] United States Department of Justice Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2014.
Uniform Crime Reporting Program Data: Police Employee (LEOKA) Data,
2012. (2014). https://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR35020.v1
[44] United States Department of Justice Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2015.
Uniform Crime Reporting Program Data: National Incident-Based Reporting
System, 2013. (2015). https://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR36120.v2
[45] United States Department of Justice Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2015.
Uniform Crime Reporting Program Data: Police Employee (LEOKA) Data,
2013. (2015). https://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR36119.v1
[46] United States Department of Justice Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2016.
Uniform Crime Reporting Program Data: National Incident-Based Reporting
System, 2014. (2016). https://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR36398.v1
[47] United States Department of Justice Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2016.
Uniform Crime Reporting Program Data: Police Employee (LEOKA) Data,
2014. (2016). https://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR36395.v1
[48] United States Department of Justice Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2017.
Uniform Crime Reporting Program Data: National Incident-Based Reporting
System, 2015. (2017). https://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR36795.v1
[49] United States Department of Justice Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2017.
Uniform Crime Reporting Program Data: Police Employee (LEOKA) Data,
2015. (2017). https://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR36791.v1
[50] United States Department of Justice Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2018.
Uniform Crime Reporting Program Data: National Incident-Based Reporting
System, [United States], 2016. (2018). https://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR37065.v2
[51] United States Department of Justice Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2018.
Uniform Crime Reporting Program Data: Police Employee (LEOKA) Data,
United States, 2016. (2018). https://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR37062.v1
[52] Richard B Felson and Brendan Lantz. 2016. When are victims unlikely to
cooperate with the police? Aggressive behavior 42, 1 (2016), 97–108.
[53] Garrett Fitzmaurice, Marie Davidian, Geert Verbeke, and Geert Molenberghs.
2008. Longitudinal data analysis. CRC press.
[54] Anthony W Flores, Kristin Bechtel, and Christopher T Lowenkamp. 2016. False
Positives, False Negatives, and False Analyses: A Rejoinder to “Machine Bias:
There’s Software Used Across the Country to Predict Future Criminals. And it’s
Biased Against Blacks.”. Unpublished manuscript (2016).
[55] Riccardo Fogliato, Max G’Sell, and Alexandra Chouldechova. 2020. Fairness
Evaluation in Presence of Biased Noisy Labels. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.13808
(2020).
[56] David A Freedman. 2006. On the so-called “Huber sandwich estimator” and
“robust standard errors”. The American Statistician 60, 4 (2006), 299–302.
[57] Sharad Goel, Justin M Rao, Ravi Shroff, et al. 2016. Precinct or prejudice?
Understanding racial disparities in New York City’s stop-and-frisk policy. The
Annals of Applied Statistics 10, 1 (2016), 365–394.
[58] Sharad Goel, Ravi Shroff, Jennifer L Skeem, and Christopher Slobogin. 2018.
The accuracy, equity, and jurisprudence of criminal risk assessment. Equity, and
Jurisprudence of Criminal Risk Assessment (December 26, 2018) (2018).
[59] Ben Green. 2020. The false promise of risk assessments: epistemic reform
and the limits of fairness. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness,
Accountability, and Transparency. 594–606.
[60] Mark Greenblatt, Mark Fahey, Bernice Yeung, and Emily Harris. 2018.
FBI
Moves
to
Fix
Critical
Flaw
in
Its
Crime
Reporting
System.
(2018). https://www.propublica.org/article/fbi-moves-to-fix-critical-flaw-in-its-
crime-reporting-system.
On the Validity of Arrest as a Proxy for Offense
AIES ’21, May 19–21, 2021, Virtual Event, USA.
[61] Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nathan Srebro. 2016. Equality of opportunity in
supervised learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.02413 (2016).
[62] Jim Hester and Hadley Wickham. 2020. vroom: Read and Write Rectangular
Text Data Quickly.
https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=vroom R package
version 1.3.2.
[63] Michael J Hindelang. 1978. Race and involvement in common law personal
crimes. American sociological review (1978), 93–109.
[64] David Hirschel, Eve Buzawa, April Pattavina, and Don Faggiani. 2007. Domestic
violence and mandatory arrest laws: To what extent do they influence police
arrest decisions. J. Crim. L. & Criminology 98 (2007), 255.
[65] Daniel E Ho and Alice Xiang. 2020. Affirmative Algorithms: The Legal Grounds
for Fairness as Awareness. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.14285 (2020).
[66] Jared Huling. 2019. fastglm: Fast and Stable Fitting of Generalized Linear
Models using ’RcppEigen’. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=fastglm R
package version 0.0.1.
[67] James E Johndrow, Kristian Lum, et al. 2019. An algorithm for removing
sensitive information: application to race-independent recidivism prediction. The
Annals of Applied Statistics 13, 1 (2019), 189–220.
[68] Robert J Kane. 2002. The social ecology of police misconduct. Criminology 40,
4 (2002), 867–896.
[69] Robert J Kane. 2005. Compromised police legitimacy as a predictor of violent
crime in structurally disadvantaged communities. Criminology 43, 2 (2005),
469–498.
[70] Jacob Kaplan. 2020. asciiSetupReader: Reads Fixed-Width ASCII Data Files
(.txt or .dat) that Have Accompanying Setup Files (.sps or .sas). https://CRAN.R-
project.org/package=asciiSetupReader R package version 2.3.2.
[71] Stephanie L Kent and David Jacobs. 2005. Minority threat and police strength
from 1980 to 2000: A fixed-effects analysis of nonlinear and interactive effects
in large US cities. Criminology 43, 3 (2005), 731–760.
[72] David S Kirk and Mauri Matsuda. 2011. Legal cynicism, collective efficacy, and
the ecology of arrest. Criminology 49, 2 (2011), 443–472.
[73] Jon Kleinberg, Himabindu Lakkaraju, Jure Leskovec, Jens Ludwig, and Sendhil
Mullainathan. 2018. Human decisions and machine predictions. The quarterly
journal of economics 133, 1 (2018), 237–293.
[74] Jon Kleinberg, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Manish Raghavan. 2016.
In-
herent trade-offs in the fair determination of risk scores.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.05807 (2016).
[75] David A Klinger. 1997. Negotiating order in patrol work: An ecological theory
of police response to deviance. Criminology 35, 2 (1997), 277–306.
[76] Tammy Rinehart Kochel, David B Wilson, and Stephen D Mastrofski. 2011.
Effect of suspect race on officers’ arrest decisions. Criminology 49, 2 (2011),
473–512.
[77] Charis E Kubrin and Ronald Weitzer. 2003. Retaliatory homicide: Concentrated
disadvantage and neighborhood culture. Social problems 50, 2 (2003), 157–180.
[78] Brendan Lantz and Marin R Wenger. 2019. The co-offender as counterfactual:
A quasi-experimental within-partnership approach to the examination of the
relationship between race and arrest. Journal of experimental criminology (2019),
1–24.
[79] Allen E Liska and Mitchell B Chamlin. 1984. Social structure and crime control
among macrosocial units. American journal of sociology 90, 2 (1984), 383–395.
[80] Allen E Liska, Mitchell B Chamlin, and Mark D Reed. 1985. Testing the
economic production and conflict models of crime control. Social Forces 64, 1
(1985), 119–138.
[81] Charles E Loeffler, Jordan Hyatt, and Greg Ridgeway. 2019. Measuring self-
reported wrongful convictions among prisoners. Journal of Quantitative Crimi-
nology 35, 2 (2019), 259–286.
[82] Kristian Lum and William Isaac. 2016. To predict and serve? Significance 13, 5
(2016), 14–19.
[83] Daniel J Lytle. 2014. The effects of suspect characteristics on arrest: A meta-
analysis. Journal of Criminal Justice 42, 6 (2014), 589–597.
[84] Philip D McCormack, April Pattavina, and Paul E Tracy. 2017. Assessing
the coverage and representativeness of the National Incident-Based Reporting
System. Crime & Delinquency 63, 4 (2017), 493–516.
[85] Jill Theresa Messing and Jonel Thaller. 2013. The average predictive validity of
intimate partner violence risk assessment instruments. Journal of interpersonal
violence 28, 7 (2013), 1537–1558.
[86] Cade Metz and Adam Satariano. 2020. An algorithm that grants freedom, or
takes it away. The New York Times (2020).
[87] Rachel E Morgan and Jennifer L Truman. 2019. Criminal victimization, 2019.
Bureau of Justice Statistics 845 (2019).
[88] Sendhil Mullainathan. 2019. Biased algorithms are easier to fix than biased
people. The New York Times (2019).
[89] Kirill Müller. 2020. here: A Simpler Way to Find Your Files. https://CRAN.R-
project.org/package=here R package version 1.0.1.
[90] United States Department of Justice. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI).
2019. 2019 National Incident-Based Reporting System User Manual.
https:
//ucr.fbi.gov/nibrs/nibrs-user-manual
[91] Graham C Ousey and Matthew R Lee. 2008. Racial disparity in formal social
control: An investigation of alternative explanations of arrest rate inequality.
Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency 45, 3 (2008), 322–355.
[92] Karen F Parker, Brian J Stults, and Stephen K Rice. 2005. Racial threat, concen-
trated disadvantage and social control: Considering the macro-level sources of
variation in arrests. Criminology 43, 4 (2005), 1111–1134.
[93] April Pattavina, Danielle Marie Carkin, and Paul E Tracy. 2017. Assessing the
representativeness of NIBRS arrest data. Crime & Delinquency 63, 12 (2017),
1626–1652.
[94] Emma Pierson, Camelia Simoiu, Jan Overgoor, Sam Corbett-Davies, Daniel
Jenson, Amy Shoemaker, Vignesh Ramachandran, Phoebe Barghouty, Cheryl
Phillips, Ravi Shroff, et al. 2020. A large-scale analysis of racial disparities in
police stops across the United States. Nature human behaviour (2020), 1–10.
[95] Alex R Piquero and Alfred Blumstein. 2007. Does incapacitation reduce crime?
Journal of Quantitative Criminology 23, 4 (2007), 267–285.
[96] Carl E Pope and Howard N Snyder. 2003. Race as a factor in juvenile arrests.
US Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Office of Juvenile . . . .
[97] Janice L Puckett and Richard J Lundman. 2003. Factors affecting homicide
clearances: Multivariate analysis of a more complete conceptual framework.
Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency 40, 2 (2003), 171–193.
[98] Rashida Richardson, Jason Schultz, and Kate Crawford. 2019. Dirty data, bad
predictions: How civil rights violations impact police data, predictive policing
systems, and justice. New York University Law Review Online, Forthcoming
(2019).
[99] Aki Roberts and Christopher J Lyons. 2009. Victim-offender racial dyads and
clearance of lethal and nonlethal assault. Journal of research in crime and
delinquency 46, 3 (2009), 301–326.
[100] Aki Roberts and John M Roberts. 2016. Crime clearance and temporal variation
in police investigative workload: Evidence from National Incident-Based Report-
ing System (NIBRS) data. Journal of Quantitative Criminology 32, 4 (2016),
651–674.
[101] Donald B Rubin. 1976. Inference and missing data. Biometrika 63, 3 (1976),
581–592.
[102] Donald B Rubin. 2004. Multiple imputation for nonresponse in surveys. Vol. 81.
John Wiley & Sons.
[103] Jennifer L Skeem and Christopher T Lowenkamp. 2016. Risk, race, and recidi-
vism: Predictive bias and disparate impact. Criminology 54, 4 (2016), 680–712.
[104] Frederick Solt and Kellen Gracey. 2020. icpsrdata: Reproducible Data Retrieval
from the ICPSR Archive.
https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=icpsrdata R
package version 0.5.0.
[105] Rodney Stark. 1987. Deviant places: A theory of the ecology of crime. Crimi-
nology 25, 4 (1987), 893–910.
[106] Darrell Steffensmeier, Ben Feldmeyer, Casey T Harris, and Jeffery T Ulmer. 2011.
Reassessing trends in black violent crime, 1980–2008: Sorting out the “Hispanic
effect” in Uniform Crime Reports arrests, National Crime Victimization Survey
offender estimates, and US prisoner counts. Criminology 49, 1 (2011), 197–251.
[107] Lisa Stolzenberg, Stewart J D’Alessio, and David Eitle. 2004. A multilevel test
of racial threat theory. Criminology 42, 3 (2004), 673–698.
[108] Brian J Stults and Eric P Baumer. 2007. Racial context and police force size:
Evaluating the empirical validity of the minority threat perspective. Amer. J.
Sociology 113, 2 (2007), 507–546.
[109] Jason Sunshine and Tom R Tyler. 2003. The role of procedural justice and
legitimacy in shaping public support for policing. Law & society review 37, 3
(2003), 513–548.
[110] R Core Team et al. 2013. R: A language and environment for statistical computing.
(2013).
[111] William Terrill and Michael D Reisig. 2003. Neighborhood context and police
use of force. Journal of research in crime and delinquency 40, 3 (2003), 291–
321.
[112] Michael Tonry. 1995. Malign neglect: Race, crime, and punishment in America.
Oxford University Press.
[113] Tom R Tyler and Jeffrey Fagan. 2008. Legitimacy and cooperation: Why do
people help the police fight crime in their communities. Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 6
(2008), 231.
[114] Tom R Tyler, Jeffrey Fagan, and Amanda Geller. 2014. Street stops and police
legitimacy: Teachable moments in young urban men’s legal socialization. Journal
of empirical legal studies 11, 4 (2014), 751–785.
[115] Kevin Ushey. 2021. renv: Project Environments. https://CRAN.R-project.org/
package=renv R package version 0.12.5.
[116] Stef van Buuren and Karin Groothuis-Oudshoorn. 2011. mice: Multivariate
Imputation by Chained Equations in R. Journal of Statistical Software 45, 3
(2011), 1–67. https://www.jstatsoft.org/v45/i03/
[117] Tyler J VanderWeele and Whitney R Robinson. 2014. On causal interpreta-
tion of race in regressions adjusting for confounding and mediating variables.
Epidemiology (Cambridge, Mass.) 25, 4 (2014), 473.
[118] Davis Vaughan and Matt Dancho. 2021. furrr: Apply Mapping Functions in
Parallel using Futures. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=furrr R package
version 0.2.2.
AIES ’21, May 19–21, 2021, Virtual Event, USA.
Fogliato, Xiang, Lipton, Nagin, Chouldechova
[119] Anthony Walsh. 2004. Race and crime: A biosocial analysis. Nova Publishers.
[120] Ronald Weitzer and Rod K Brunson. 2015. Policing different racial groups in
the United States. Cahiers Politiestudies 6, 35 (2015), 129.
[121] Ronald Weitzer and Steven A Tuch. 1999. Race, class, and perceptions of
discrimination by the police. Crime & Delinquency 45, 4 (1999), 494–507.
[122] Ronald Weitzer and Steven A Tuch. 2004. Race and perceptions of police
misconduct. Social problems 51, 3 (2004), 305–325.
[123] Hadley
Wickham,
Mara
Averick,
Jennifer
Bryan,
Winston
Chang,
Lucy D’Agostino McGowan, Romain Francois, Garrett Grolemund, Alex Hayes,
Lionel Henry, Jim Hester, Max Kuhn, Thomas Lin Pedersen, Evan Miller,
Stephan Milton Bache, Kirill Müller, Jeroen Ooms, David Robinson, Dana Paige
Seidel, Vitalie Spinu, Kohske Takahashi, Davis Vaughan, Claus Wilke, Kara
Woo, and Hiroaki Yutani. 2019. Welcome to the tidyverse. Journal of Open
Source Software 4, 43 (2019), 1686. https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.01686
[124] Hadley Wickham and Evan Miller. 2020. haven: Import and Export ’SPSS’,
’Stata’ and ’SAS’ Files. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=haven R package
version 2.3.1.
[125] James Q Wilson. 1978. Varieties of police behavior: The Management of law
and Order in eight communities, with a new preface by the author. Harvard
University Press.
[126] Min Xie and Janet L Lauritsen. 2012. Racial context and crime reporting: A test
of Black’s stratification hypothesis. Journal of quantitative criminology 28, 2
(2012), 265–293.
[127] Yihui Xie. 2015. Dynamic Documents with R and knitr (2nd ed.). Chapman and
Hall/CRC, Boca Raton, Florida. https://yihui.org/knitr/ ISBN 978-1498716963.
[128] Achim Zeileis, Susanne Köll, and Nathaniel Graham. 2020. Various versatile
variances: An object-oriented implementation of clustered covariances in R.
Journal of Statistical Software 95, 1 (2020), 1–36.
[129] Hao Zhu. 2020. kableExtra: Construct Complex Table with ’kable’ and Pipe
Syntax. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=kableExtra R package version
1.3.1.
A
ADDITIONAL DETAILS ON DATA
ANALYSIS
Clearance by arrest and by exceptional means. Incidents can be
cleared either by an arrest or by exceptional means. An offense is
cleared by arrest when at least one person is arrested, charged with
the commission of the offense, and turned over to the court for prose-
cution [31]. In case of individuals below the age of 18, physical arrest
is not necessary. The arrest of multiple offenders may correspond
to the clearance of one offense, and many offenses may be cleared
by only one arrest. An offense is cleared by exceptional means if
the following conditions are satisfied: (i) the investigation has estab-
lished the identity of the offender; (ii) there is enough information
to support an arrest, charge, and turn over the offender to the court
for prosecution; (iii) the exact location of the offender is known and
the offender could be taken into custody; (iv) there is some reason
outside of law enforcement control that precludes arresting, charg-
ing, and prosecuting the offender. Clearance by exceptional means
occurs in case of death of the offender, denied prosecution, custody
of other jurisdiction, refusal of the victim to cooperate, when the
offender is a juvenile and thus they are not taken into custody.
We investigate whether there exist differences in the likelihood
of clearance by exceptiona means and reasons behind the clearance
across racial groups of offenders and victims. The type of offense
with the largest share of incidents that are cleared by exceptional
means is forcible rape (about 20%). Slightly more than 10% of
these incidents are cleared because of prosecutorial declination to
prosecute and another 8% due to lack of victim’s cooperation. In
case of murder/non-negligent manslaughter, 5% and 14% of all
incidents are cleared by exceptional means for Black and White
offenders. The majority of these offenses results into the death of
the offender. Clearance by exceptional means in offenses of robbery
(8%), aggravated assaults (9%), and simple assaults (14%) is mainly
due to prosecutorial declination to prosecute and victims’ lack of
cooperation, the latter likely being due to cases of domestic violence.
Incidents are cleared at the same rates across the two racial groups
for all crime types other than murder/non-negligent manslaughter.
An analogous analysis of the likelihood of exceptional clearance
conditioning on the racial groups of the victims reveals similar
results.
Additional results for §6. Figure 2 shows the arrest rates by state
and offender’s race. The coefficients estimates of the logistic regres-
sion model are presented in Table 2. Lastly, Figure 3 displays the
focal slope model diagnostics. More details regarding these figures
are contained in the captions and in the main body of the paper.
Software. In our analysis, we used the following R packages.
For data processing and visualization, we used the tidyverse
set of packages [123]. Specifically for the statistical modeling, we
used fastglm [66], lme4 [6], mice [116], sandwich [128]. In
addition, we used icpsrdata [104], asciiSetupReader [70],
vroom [62], haven [124], renv [115], knitr [127], kableExtra
[129], xtable [24], cli [23], here [89], furrr [118].
On the Validity of Arrest as a Proxy for Offense
AIES ’21, May 19–21, 2021, Virtual Event, USA.
Table 1: Summary statistics of NIBRS data of violent offenses considered in the analysis, grouped by the offender’s race
Variable
Murder/n.n.m.
Forcible rape
Robbery
Aggravated assault
Simple assault
Race of offender
Black
White
Black
White
Black
White
Black
White
Black
White
# observations
4787
4394
32532
70777
76566
24567
275697
320627
1045225
1624174
% observations
52%
48%
31%
69%
76%
24%
46%
54%
39%
61%
% intraracial crime
86%
94%
63%
97%
57%
91%
81%
94%
78%
96%
% arrests
67%
73%
25%
27%
19%
36%
44%
62%
43%
57%
% arrests (intraracial)
66%
73%
27%
27%
17%
37%
43%
62%
42%
58%
% arrests (interracial)
71%
71%
22%
23%
21%
30%
51%
51%
49%
47%
Notes: “# observations” and “% observations” indicate the number of observation and the ratio between the number of offender of a certain race and the total number of offenders for
that crime respectively in each bucket (e.g., Black simple assault offenders). “% intraracial crime” corresponds to the share of victims whose race is the same as the offender’s race, i.e.,
intraracial crime. “% arrests”, “% arrests (intraracial)”, “% arrests (interracial)” indicate the arrest rates for all offenses, only intraracial offenses, and only interracial offenses
(conditioning on the offender’s race) respectively.
Table 2: Coefficients estimates (and sandwich standard errors) of a logistic regression model that estimates the likelihood of arrest on NIBRS data
Variable
Murder/n.n.m.
Forcible rape
Robbery
Aggravated assault
Simple assault
Age of offender
-0.01 (0.00)***
0.01 (0.00)***
0.01 (0.00)***
0.00 (0.00)***
-0.01 (0.00)***
Offender male
-0.18 (0.09)*
2.74 (1.02)**
-0.11 (0.03)**
-0.11 (0.01)***
0.01 (0.00)***
Offender white
-0.20 (0.09)*
0.04 (0.02).
0.24 (0.02)***
0.03 (0.01)***
0.04 (0.00)***
Age of victim
0.00 (0.00)
-0.02 (0.00)***
0.00 (0.00)
0.01 (0.00)***
0.01 (0.00)***
Victim male
0.20 (0.06)***
2.64 (1.02)**
-0.10 (0.02)***
-0.12 (0.01)***
-0.14 (0.00)***
Victim white
-0.02 (0.08)
-0.11 (0.03)***
0.03 (0.02)
0.07 (0.01)***
0.09 (0.00)***
Minor injury
-0.31 (0.02)***
0.01 (0.02)
-0.24 (0.01)***
-0.50 (0.00)***
Serious injury
0.32 (0.03)***
0.16 (0.03)***
0.25 (0.01)***
0.83 (0.38)*
During day
-0.01 (0.05)
-0.10 (0.02)***
0.31 (0.02)***
-0.02 (0.01)***
-0.11 (0.00)***
Offender stranger
-0.48 (0.06)***
-0.66 (0.02)***
-0.81 (0.02)***
-0.53 (0.01)***
-0.32 (0.00)***
Residence
0.18 (0.05)***
0.20 (0.02)***
-0.08 (0.02)***
0.32 (0.01)***
0.30 (0.00)***
Offender alcohol use
0.63 (0.11)***
0.01 (0.02)
0.69 (0.04)***
0.56 (0.01)***
0.56 (0.00)***
Offender substance use
0.02 (0.14)
-0.36 (0.04)***
0.22 (0.06)***
-0.02 (0.02)
0.09 (0.01)***
Firearm present
-0.58 (0.08)***
-0.16 (0.07)*
-0.27 (0.02)***
-0.24 (0.01)***
Other weapon present
0.14 (0.09)
0.15 (0.05)**
-0.02 (0.03)
0.09 (0.01)***
Offense not completed
0.16 (0.03)***
0.11 (0.02)***
# Officers per 1000 capita (ORI)
0.00 (0.00)
0.01 (0.00)***
0.00 (0.00)
0.00 (0.00)***
0.00 (0.00)
% black offenders (ORI)
-0.20 (0.16)
-0.43 (0.05)***
-0.66 (0.05)***
-0.99 (0.02)***
-0.97 (0.01)***
Population served (ORI)
0.00 (0.00)***
0.00 (0.00)*
0.00 (0.00)***
0.00 (0.00)***
0.00 (0.00)***
Core city
0.26 (0.07)***
-0.21 (0.02)***
-0.12 (0.02)***
-0.02 (0.01)*
0.04 (0.00)***
Significance codes: p−value<0.001 ‘***’, 𝑝< 0.01 ‘**’, 𝑝< 0.05 ‘*’, 𝑝< 0.1 ‘.’
Notes: As a reminder, we only consider incidents involving lone victims and offenders of race Black or White (Hispanics are included), that occurred in the 16 states considered in the
analysis between 2007 and 2016, and were not cleared by exceptional means. Coefficients estimates of dummies for states and years are omitted from the table. For a discussion of the
estimates, see §6.2.
AIES ’21, May 19–21, 2021, Virtual Event, USA.
Fogliato, Xiang, Lipton, Nagin, Chouldechova
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
MT
ID
CO
AR
TN
KY
WV
VA
SC
SD
IA
MI
VT
NH
State code
Arrest rate
Race of offender
Black
White
Arrest rates for murder non−negligent manslaughter
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
MT
ID
CO
AR
TN
KY
WV
VA
SC
DE
SD
ND
IA
MI
VT
NH
State code
Arrest rate
Race of offender
Black
White
Arrest rates for forcible rape
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
MT
ID
CO
AR
TN
KY
WV
VA
SC
DE
SD
ND
IA
MI
VT
NH
State code
Arrest rate
Race of offender
Black
White
Arrest rates for robbery
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
MT
ID
CO
AR
TN
KY
WV
VA
SC
DE
SD
ND
IA
MI
VT
NH
State code
Arrest rate
Race of offender
Black
White
Arrest rates for aggravated assault
Figure 2: Arrest rates by offender’s race and state for murder/non-negligent manslaughter, forcible rape, robbery, and aggravated assault in the NIBRS data
considered in the analysis. Only groups of observations (state-offender’s race) containing more than 50 crime incidents are considered. Error bars indicate 95%
confidence intervals. Note that arrest rates largely vary across crime types and states. They are highest in case of murder/non-negligent manslaughter, and lowest
for robbery and forcible rape. The gap in arrest rates between offenders’ racial groups within states is generally small.
On the Validity of Arrest as a Proxy for Offense
AIES ’21, May 19–21, 2021, Virtual Event, USA.
Minor injury
Serious injury
Multiple offenses
% black offenders (ORI)
# Officers per 1000 capita (ORI)
Population served (ORI)
Victim male
Victim white
Age of victim
Offender male
Age of offender
Offender stranger
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
10
20
30
400e+00
2e+05
4e+05
6e+05
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
10
20
30
40
50
20
30
40
50
60 0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
−0.50
−0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
−0.50
−0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
Value of group's center
Coef. of offender's race (white=1)
Focal slope diagnostics for forcible rape
Minor injury
Serious injury
Multiple offenses
% black offenders (ORI)
# Officers per 1000 capita (ORI)
Population served (ORI)
Victim male
Victim white
Age of victim
Offender male
Age of offender
Offender stranger
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
10
20
30
40
0
250000 500000 750000
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
20
40
60
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
20
30
40
50
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
−0.50
−0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
−0.50
−0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
Value of group's center
Coef. of offender's race (white=1)
Focal slope diagnostics for robbery
Minor injury
Serious injury
Multiple offenses
% black offenders (ORI)
# Officers per 1000 capita (ORI)
Population served (ORI)
Victim male
Victim white
Age of victim
Offender male
Age of offender
Offender stranger
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
10
20
30
40
0
250000
500000
750000
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
20
40
60
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
20
30
40
50
60
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
−0.50
−0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
−0.50
−0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
Value of group's center
Coef. of offender's race (white=1)
Focal slope diagnostics for aggravated assault
Minor injury
Serious injury
Multiple offenses
% black offenders (ORI)
# Officers per 1000 capita (ORI)
Population served (ORI)
Victim male
Victim white
Age of victim
Offender male
Age of offender
Offender stranger
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
10
20
30
400e+00
2e+05
4e+05
6e+05
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
20
40
60
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
20
30
40
50
60 0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
−0.50
−0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
−0.50
−0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
Value of group's center
Coef. of offender's race (white=1)
Focal slope diagnostics for simple assault
Figure 3: “Focal slope” model diagnostic for the logistic regression model whose coefficients estimates are presented in table 2. The diagnostics for the offense
of murder/non-negligent manslaughter are omitted due to the small sample size. The methodology behind the diagnostics is described in §4. The grey points
correspond to the coefficient estimates relative to the offender’s race (White=1) obtained by fitting the logistic regression model on each of 100 bootstrapped
datasets, for each feature (panel’s title) and feature’s grid value (value on the grid, horizontal axis). The black dots correspond to the means of such estimates. We
observe that the size and sign of the values of the black dots vary across the range of the regressors. This suggests the presence of interactions between race and
the regressors, thereby indicating the misspecification of our modeling approach. For example, the association between the offender’s race (White=1) and the
outcome is positive when the victim is White, but it’s close to zero or even negative when the victim’s race is Black across three of the four crime types. In case
of assaults, the association is weak or even negative in police agencies where offenders mainly belong to one of the two racial groups considered, and positive
otherwise.
