Climate change projections using the IPSL-CM5 Earth System
Model: from CMIP3 to CMIP5
J.-L. Dufresne • M.-A. Foujols • S. Denvil • A. Caubel • O. Marti • O. Aumont • Y. Balkanski • S. Bekki •
H. Bellenger • R. Benshila • S. Bony • L. Bopp • P. Braconnot • P. Brockmann • P. Cadule • F. Cheruy •
F. Codron • A. Cozic • D. Cugnet • N. de Noblet • J.-P. Duvel • C. Ethe´ • L. Fairhead • T. Fichefet •
S. Flavoni • P. Friedlingstein • J.-Y. Grandpeix • L. Guez • E. Guilyardi • D. Hauglustaine • F. Hourdin •
A. Idelkadi • J. Ghattas • S. Joussaume • M. Kageyama • G. Krinner • S. Labetoulle • A. Lahellec •
M.-P. Lefebvre • F. Lefevre • C. Levy • Z. X. Li • J. Lloyd • F. Lott • G. Madec • M. Mancip • M. Marchand •
S. Masson • Y. Meurdesoif • J. Mignot • I. Musat • S. Parouty • J. Polcher • C. Rio • M. Schulz • D. Swingedouw •
S. Szopa • C. Talandier • P. Terray • N. Viovy • N. Vuichard
Received: 14 November 2011 / Accepted: 15 December 2012 / Published online: 24 February 2013
 The Author(s) 2013. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract
We present the global general circulation model
IPSL-CM5 developed to study the long-term response of the
climate system to natural and anthropogenic forcings as part
of the 5th Phase of the Coupled Model Intercomparison
Project (CMIP5). This model includes an interactive carbon
cycle, a representation of tropospheric and stratospheric
chemistry, and a comprehensive representation of aerosols.
As it represents the principal dynamical, physical, and bio-
geochemical processes relevant to the climate system, it may
be referred to as an Earth System Model. However, the
IPSL-CM5
model
may
be
used
in
a
multitude
of
conﬁgurations associated with different boundary condi-
tions and with a range of complexities in terms of processes
and interactions. This paper presents an overview of the
different model components and explains how they were
coupled and used to simulate historical climate changes over
the past 150 years and different scenarios of future climate
change. A single version of the IPSL-CM5 model (IPSL-
CM5A-LR) was used to provide climate projections asso-
ciated with different socio-economic scenarios, including
the different Representative Concentration Pathways con-
sidered by CMIP5 and several scenarios from the Special
Report on Emission Scenarios considered by CMIP3.
Results suggest that the magnitude of global warming pro-
jections primarily depends on the socio-economic scenario
considered, that there is potential for an aggressive mitiga-
tion policy to limit global warming to about two degrees, and
This paper is a contribution to the special issue on the IPSL and
CNRM global climate and Earth System Models, both developed in
France and contributing to the 5th coupled model intercomparison
project.
J.-L. Dufresne (&)  S. Bony  F. Cheruy  F. Codron 
J.-P. Duvel  L. Fairhead  J.-Y. Grandpeix  L. Guez 
F. Hourdin  A. Idelkadi  A. Lahellec  M.-P. Lefebvre 
Z. X. Li  F. Lott  I. Musat  J. Polcher  C. Rio
Laboratoire de Me´te´orologie Dynamique (LMD/IPSL), Centre
National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque (CNRS), Ecole Normale
Supe´rieure (ENS), Ecole Polytechnique (EP), Universite´ Pierre
et Marie Curie (UPMC), Paris, France
e-mail: Jean-Louis.Dufresne@lmd.jussieu.fr
M.-A. Foujols  S. Denvil  P. Cadule  C. Ethe´  J. Ghattas 
M. Mancip
Institut Pierre Simon Laplace (IPSL), Centre National
de la Recherche Scientiﬁque (CNRS), Universite´ de
Versailles Saint-Quentin (UVSQ), Universite´ Pierre et Marie
Curie (UPMC), Commissariat a` l’Energie Atomique (CEA),
Institut de Recherche pour le De´veloppement (IRD), Ecole
Normale Supe´rieure (ENS), Ecole Polytechnique (EP),
Universite´ Denis Diderot, Universite´ Paris-Est Cre´teil,
Paris, France
A. Caubel  O. Marti  Y. Balkanski  L. Bopp  P. Braconnot 
P. Brockmann  A. Cozic  N. de Noblet  P. Friedlingstein 
D. Hauglustaine  S. Joussaume  M. Kageyama 
Y. Meurdesoif  M. Schulz  D. Swingedouw  S. Szopa 
N. Viovy  N. Vuichard
Laboratoire des Sciences du Climat et de l’Environnement
(LSCE/IPSL), Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque
(CNRS), Commissariat a` l’Energie Atomique (CEA),
Universite´ de Versailles Saint-Quentin (UVSQ),
Gif-sur-Yvette, France
O. Aumont  C. Talandier
Laboratoire de Physique des Oce´ans (LPO), Centre National de
la Recherche Scientiﬁque (CNRS), Institut Franc¸ais de
Recherche pour l’Exploitation de la Mer (Ifremer),
Institut de Recherche pour le De´veloppement (IRD),
Universite´ de Bretagne Occidentale (UBO),
Brest, France
123
Clim Dyn (2013) 40:2123–2165
DOI 10.1007/s00382-012-1636-1
that the behavior of some components of the climate system
such as the Arctic sea ice and the Atlantic Meridional
Overturning Circulation may change drastically by the end
of the twenty-ﬁrst century in the case of a no climate policy
scenario. Although the magnitude of regional temperature
and precipitation changes depends fairly linearly on the
magnitude of the projected global warming (and thus on the
scenario considered), the geographical pattern of these
changes is strikingly similar for the different scenarios. The
representation of atmospheric physical processes in the
model is shown to strongly inﬂuence the simulated climate
variability and both the magnitude and pattern of the pro-
jected climate changes.
Keywords
Climate  Climate change  Climate
projections  Earth System Model  CMIP5  CMIP3 
Greenhouse gases  Aerosols  Carbon cycle  Allowable
emissions  RCP scenarios  Land use changes
1 Introduction
As climate change projections rely on climate model
results, the scientiﬁc community organizes regular inter-
national projects to intercompare these models. Over the
years, the various phases of the Coupled Model Inter-
comparison Project (CMIP) have grown steadily both in
terms of participants’ number and scientiﬁc impacts. The
model outputs made available by the third phase of CMIP
(CMIP3, Meehl et al. 2005; 2007a) have led to hundreds of
publications and provided important inputs to the IPCC
fourth assessment report (IPCC, 2007). The ﬁfth phase,
CMIP5 (Taylor et al. 2012), is also expected to serve the
scientiﬁc community for many years and to provide major
inputs to the forthcoming IPCC ﬁfth assessment report.
The IPSL-CM4 model (Marti et al. 2010) developed at
Institut Pierre Simon Laplace (IPSL) contributed to
CMIP3. It is a classical climate model that couples an
atmosphere–land surface model to a ocean–sea ice model.
It has been used to simulate and to analyze tropical climate
variability (Braconnot et al. 2007), climate change pro-
jections (Dufresne et al. 2005), paleo climates (Alkama
et al. 2008; Marzin and Braconnot 2009), and the impact of
Greenland ice sheet melting on the Atlantic meridional
overturning circulation (Swingedouw et al. 2007b, 2009)
among other studies. Using the same physical package,
separate developments have been carried out to simulate
tropospheric chemistry (Hauglustaine et al. 2004), tropo-
spheric aerosols (Balkanski et al. 2010), stratospheric
chemistry (Jourdain et al. 2008), and the carbon cycle
(Friedlingstein et al. 2006; Cadule et al. 2009). The model
with the carbon cycle (IPSL-CM4-LOOP) has been used to
study feedbacks between climate and biogeochemical
processes. For instance, Lenton et al. (2009) have shown
that a change in stratospheric ozone may modify the carbon
cycle through a modiﬁcation of the atmospheric and oce-
anic circulations. Lengaigne et al. (2009) have suggested
positive feedbacks between sea-ice extent and chlorophyll
distribution in the Arctic region on a seasonal time scale.
The IPSL-CM5 model, which is presented here and
contributes to CMIP5, is an Earth System Model (ESM)
that includes all the previous developments. It is a platform
that allows for a consistent suite of models with various
degrees of complexity, various numbers of components and
processes, and different resolutions. Similar approaches
have been adopted in other climate modeling centers (e.g.
Martin et al. 2011). This ﬂexibility is difﬁcult to implement
and to keep up to date but it is useful for many studies. For
instance, when studying the various feedbacks of the cli-
mate system, it is common to replace some components or
processes by prescribed conditions.
When evaluating the performance of the aerosol and
chemistry components in the atmosphere, one may want to
nudge the global atmospheric circulation to the observed
one. For more theoretical studies or to investigate the
robustness of some climate features, one may wish to
drastically simplify the system by simulating for instance
an idealized aqua-planet.
It is very useful to have different versions of a model
with different ’’physical packages’’, i.e. different sets of
consistent
parameterizations.
First,
it
allows
for
the
S. Bekki  D. Cugnet  F. Lefevre  M. Marchand
Laboratoire Atmosphe`res, Milieux, Observations Spatiales
(LATMOS/IPSL), Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque
(CNRS), Universite´ de Versailles Saint-Quentin (UVSQ),
Universite´ Pierre et Marie Curie (UPMC), Paris, France
H. Bellenger  R. Benshila  S. Flavoni  E. Guilyardi 
S. Labetoulle  C. Levy  J. Lloyd  G. Madec  S. Masson 
J. Mignot  C. Talandier  P. Terray
Laboratoire d’Oce´anographie et du Climat: Expe´rimentation et
Approches Nume´riques (LOCEAN/IPSL), Centre National de la
Recherche Scientiﬁque (CNRS), Universite´ Pierre et Marie
Curie (UPMC), Institut de Recherche pour le De´veloppement
(IRD), Museum National d’Histoire Naturelle (MNHM), Paris,
France
T. Fichefet
Georges Lemaıˆtre Centre for Earth and Climate Research, Earth
and Life Institute, Universite´ Catholique de Louvain,
1348 Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
P. Friedlingstein
College of Engineering, Mathematics and Physical Sciences,
University of Exeter, Exeter EX4 4QF, UK
G. Krinner  S. Parouty
Laboratoire de Glaciologie et Ge´ophysique de l’Environnement
(LGGE), Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque (CNRS),
Universite´ Joseph Fourier (UJF), Grenoble, France
2124
J.-L. Dufresne et al.
123
analysis of the role of some physical processes on the
climate system such as deep convection (e.g. Braconnot
et al. 2007). Second, it facilitates the developments of the
ESM, which is an ongoing process. Indeed developing and
adjusting the physical package requires time. As these
developments strongly impact the characteristics of the
biogeochemistry variables
(e.g. aerosol concentration,
chemistry composition,. . .), it is important that a frozen
version of the physical package is used while the models
including the other processes are being developed. In the
previous IPSL-CM4 model, most of the chemistry and
aerosol studies where ﬁrst made using the LMDZ atmo-
spheric model with the Tiedtke convective scheme (Tied-
tke 1989) while the Emanuel convective scheme (Emanuel
1991) was included and developed to improve the char-
acteristics of the simulated climate. However these two
versions were not included in a single framework and have
diverged over the years. Conversely, the new IPSL model
includes two physical packages within the same frame-
work. IPSL-CM5A is an improved extension of IPSL-CM4
and is now used as an ESM. IPSL-CM5B includes a brand
new set of physical parameterizations in the atmospheric
model (Hourdin et al. 2013b).
The following main priorities were given to IPSL-
CM5A in order to fulﬁll our scientiﬁc priorities. The ﬁrst
was to include all necessary processes to study climate-
chemistry and climate-biogeochemistry interactions. This
was achieved by including and adapting the new compo-
nents and improvements developed at the IPSL during the
last 10 years, and by increasing the vertical resolution of
the stratosphere to make the coupling with stratospheric
chemistry possible. The second priority was to reduce the
mid-latitude cold bias (Swingedouw et al. 2007a; Marti
et al. 2010), and dedicated work on the impact of the
atmospheric grid on this cold bias has been undertaken
(Hourdin et al. 2013a). Finally, a rather coarse resolution
for both the atmosphere and the ocean was favored to allow
for long term simulations and ensembles simulations in a
reasonable amount of computing time. For the IPSL-CM5B
model, the objectives of developments were very different.
The main objective was to test some major developments
of the parameterizations of boundary layer, deep convec-
tion and clouds processes. Although this new version is
expected to have some possibly important biases due to
incomplete developments and lack of tuning, its should be
considered as a prototype of the next model generation.
The outline of the paper is the following. The IPSL-
CM5 model and its components are brieﬂy presented in
Sect. 2. The different model conﬁgurations and the dif-
ferent forcings used to perform the CMIP5 long-term
experiments are presented in Sect. 3. Among these exper-
iments, climate change simulations of the twentieth century
and projections for the twenty-ﬁrst century are analyzed in
Sects. 4 and 5. Then the climate variability and response to
the same forcing are analyzed for different versions of the
IPSL model (Sect. 6). Summary and conclusions are given
in Sect. 7.
2 The IPSL-CM5 model and its components
2.1 The platform
The IPSL-CM5 ESM platform allows for a large range of
model conﬁgurations, which aim at addressing different
scientiﬁc questions. These conﬁgurations may differ in
various ways: physical parameterizations, horizontal reso-
lution, vertical resolution, number of components (atmo-
sphere and land surface only, ocean and sea ice only,
coupled
atmosphere–land
surface–ocean–sea
ice)
and
number of processes (physical, chemistry, aerosols, carbon
cycle) (Fig. 1).
The IPSL-CM5 model is built around a physical core
that includes the atmosphere, land-surface, ocean and sea-
ice components. It also includes biogeochemical processes
through different models: stratospheric and tropospheric
chemistry, aerosols, terrestrial and oceanic carbon cycle
(Fig. 1a). To test speciﬁc hypotheses or feedback mecha-
nisms, components of the model may be suppressed and
replaced by prescribed boundary conditions or values
(Sect. 3). A general overview of the various models
included in the IPSL-CM5 model is given in the next sub-
sections.
2.2 Atmosphere
2.2.1 Atmospheric GCM: LMDZ5A and LMDZ5B
LMDZ is an atmospheric general circulation model
developed at the Laboratoire de Me´te´orologie Dynamique.
The dynamical part of the code is based on a ﬁnite-dif-
ference formulation of the primitive equations of meteo-
rology (Sadourny and Laval 1984) on a staggered and
stretchable longitude-latitude grid (the Z in LMDZ stands
for zoom). Water vapor, liquid water and atmospheric trace
species are advected with a monotonic second order ﬁnite
volume scheme (Van Leer 1977; Hourdin and Armengaud
1999). The model uses a classical so-called hybrid r - p
coordinate in the vertical. The number of layers has been
increased from 19 to 39 compared to the previous LMDZ4
version, with 15 levels above 20 km. The maximum alti-
tude for the L39 discretization is about the same as for the
stratospheric LMDZ4-L50 version (Lott et al. 2005). It is
ﬁne enough to resolve the mid-latitude waves propagation
in the stratosphere and to produce sudden-stratospheric
warmings. Two versions of LMDZ5, which differ by the
IPSL-CM5 Earth System Model
2125
123
parameterization of turbulence, convection, and clouds can
be used within IPSL-CM5.
In the LMDZ5A version, (Hourdin et al. 2013a) the
physical parameterizations are very similar to that in the
previous LMDZ4 version used for CMIP3 (Hourdin et al.
2006). The radiation scheme is inherited from the European
Center for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (Fouquart
and Bonnel 1980; Morcrette et al. 1986). The dynamical
effects of the subgrid-scale orography are parameterized
according to Lott (1999). Turbulent transport in the plan-
etary boundary layer is treated as a vertical eddy diffusion
(Laval et al. 1981) with counter-gradient correction and
dry convective adjustment. The surface boundary layer is
treated according to Louis (1979). Cloud cover and cloud
water content are computed using a statistical scheme
(Bony and Emanuel 2001). For deep convection, the
LMDZ5A version uses the ’’episodic mixing and buoyancy
sorting’’ scheme originally developed by Emanuel (1991).
LMDZ5A is used within the IPSL-CM5A model.
In the ’’New Physics’’ LMDZ5B version, (Hourdin et al.
2013b) the boundary layer is represented by a combined
eddy-diffusion plus ’’thermal plume model’’ to represent
the coherent structures of the convective boundary layer
(Hourdin et al. 2002; Rio and Hourdin 2008; Rio et al.
2010). The cloud scheme is coupled to both the convection
scheme (Bony and Emanuel 2001) and the boundary layer
scheme (Jam et al. 2013) assuming that the subgrid scale
distribution of total water can be represented by a
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
Fig. 1 Schematic of the IPSL-CM5 ESM platform. The individual
models constituting the platform are in magenta boxes, the computed
variables are in green boxes and the prescribed variables are in red
boxes. The physical and biogeochemistry models exchange aerosol,
ozone and CO2 concentrations, as detailed on the ﬁgure. They also
exchange concentration of other constituents as well as many physical
or dynamical variables, gathered in the ’’other var’’ label. In a, the
’’plain conﬁguration’’ is shown with all the models being active. In b,
the ’’atmospheric chemistry conﬁguration’’ is shown where the ocean
and the carbon cycle models have been replaced by prescribed
boundary conditions: ocean surface temperature, sea-ice fraction and
CO2 concentration. In c, the ’’climate-carbon conﬁguration’’ is shown
where the chemistry and aerosol models have been replaced by
prescribed conditions (ozone and aerosols 3D ﬁelds). The CO2
concentration is prescribed and the ’’implied CO2 emissions’’ are
computed. In d, the same conﬁguration as in c is shown except that
CO2 emissions are prescribed and CO2 concentration is computed
2126
J.-L. Dufresne et al.
123
generalized log-normal distribution in the ﬁrst case, and by
a bi-Gaussian distribution in the second case. In both cases,
the statistical moments of the total water distribution are
diagnosed as a function of both large-scale environmental
variables and subgrid scale variables predicted by the
convection or turbulence parameterizations. The triggering
and the closure of the Emanuel (1991) convective scheme
have been modiﬁed and are now based on the notions of
Available Lifting Energy for the triggering and Available
Lifting Power for the closure. A parameterization of the
cold pools generated by the re-evaporation of convective
rainfall has been introduced (Grandpeix and Lafore 2010;
Grandpeix et al. 2010). The LMDZ5B version is charac-
terized by a much better representation of the boundary
layer and associated clouds, by a delay of several hours of
the diurnal cycle of continental convection, and by a
stronger and more realistic tropical variability. LMDZ5B is
used within the IPSL-CM5B model.
2.2.2 Stratospheric chemistry: REPROBUS
The REPROBUS (Reactive Processes Ruling the Ozone
Budget in the Stratosphere) module (Lefevre et al. 1994;
1998) coupled to a tracer transport scheme is used to
interactively compute the global distribution of trace gases,
aerosols, and clouds within the stratosphere in the LMDZ
atmospheric model. The module is extensively described in
Jourdain et al. (2008). It includes 55 chemical species, the
associated stratospheric gas-phase, and heterogeneous
chemical reactions. Absorption cross-sections and kinetics
data are based on the latest Jet Propulsion Laboratory
recommendations (Sander et al. 2006). The photolysis rates
are calculated ofﬂine using a look-up table generated with
the Tropospheric and Ultraviolet visible radiative model
(Madronich and Flocke 1998). The heterogeneous chem-
istry component takes into account the reactions on sulfuric
acid aerosols, and liquid (ternary solution) and solid (Nitric
Acid Trihydrate particles, ice) Polar Stratospheric Clouds
(PSCs). The gravitational sedimentation of PSCs is also
simulated.
2.2.3 Tropospheric chemistry and aerosol: INCA
The INteraction with Chemistry and Aerosol (INCA)
model simulates the distribution of aerosols and gaseous
reactive species in the troposphere. The model accounts for
surface and in-situ emissions (lightning, aircraft), scav-
enging processes and chemical transformations. LMDZ-
INCA simulations are performed with a horizontal grid of
3.75 in longitude and 1.9 in latitude (96 9 95 grid
points). The vertical grid is based on the former LMDZ4 19
levels. Fundamentals for the gas phase chemistry are pre-
sented in Hauglustaine et al. (2004) and Folberth et al.
(2006). The tropospheric photochemistry is described
through a total of 117 tracers including 22 tracers to rep-
resent aerosols and 82 reactive chemical tracers to repre-
sent tropospheric chemistry. The model includes 223
homogeneous chemical reactions, 43 photolytic reactions
and 6 heterogeneous reactions including non-methane
hydrocarbon oxidation pathways and aerosol formation.
Biogenic surface emissions of organic compounds and soil
emissions are provided from ofﬂine simulations with the
ORCHIDEE land surface model as described by Lathie`re
et al. (2005). In this tropospheric model, ozone concen-
trations are relaxed toward present-day observations at the
uppermost model levels (altitudes higher than the 380 K
potential temperature level). The changes in stratospheric
ozone from pre-ozone hole conditions to the future are
therefore not accounted for in the simulations.
The INCA module simulates the distribution of anthro-
pogenic aerosols such as sulfates, black carbon (BC),
particulate organic matter, as well as natural aerosols such
as sea-salt and dust. The aerosol code keeps track of both
the number concentration and the mass of aerosols using a
modal approach to treat the size distribution, which is
described by a superposition of log-normal modes (Schulz
et al. 1998). Three size modes are considered: a sub-
micronic (diameters less than 1 lm), a micronic (diameters
between 1 and 10 lm) and a super-micronic (diameters
[10 lm). To account for the diversity in chemical com-
position, hygroscopicity, and mixing state, we distinguish
between soluble and insoluble modes. Sea-salt, SO4, and
methane sulfonic acid are treated as soluble components of
the aerosol, dust is treated as insoluble species, whereas BC
and particulate organic matter appear both in the soluble or
insoluble fractions. The aging of primary insoluble carbo-
naceous particles transfers insoluble aerosol number and
mass to soluble with a half-life time of 1.1 days. Details on
the aerosol component of INCA can be found in Schulz
(2007), Balkanski (2011).
The INCA model setup used to generate the aerosols and
tropospheric ozone ﬁelds used in the CMIP5 simulations
performed with IPSL-CM5 as well as the associated radi-
ative forcings are described in detail by Szopa et al. (2013)
(see also Sects. 3.5 and 3.7).
2.2.4 Coupling between chemistry, aerosol, radiation
and atmospheric circulation
The radiative impact of dust, sea salt, BC and organic
carbon aerosols was introduced in LMDZ as described in
De´andreis (2008) and Balkanski (2011). The growth in
aerosol size with increased relative humidity is computed
using the method described by Schulz (2007). The effect of
aerosol on cloud droplet radius without affecting cloud
liquid water content (the so-called ﬁrst indirect effect) is
IPSL-CM5 Earth System Model
2127
123
also accounted for. To parameterize this effect, the cloud
droplet number concentration is computed from the total
mass of soluble aerosol through the prognostic equation
from Boucher and Lohmann (1995). The coefﬁcient were
taken from aerosol-cloud relationships derived from the
Polder satellite measurements (Quaas and Boucher 2005).
Both direct and ﬁrst indirect aerosol radiative forcings are
estimated through multiple calls to the radiative code.
The tropospheric chemistry and aerosols may be either
computed or prescribed. When computed, the INCA and
LMDZ models are coupled at each time step to account for
interactions
between
chemistry,
aerosol
and
climate.
Otherwise, the aerosol concentration is usually prescribed
from monthly mean values linearly interpolated for each
day. De´andreis et al. (2012) have analyzed in detail the
difference in results obtained with the online and ofﬂine
setups for sulfate aerosols. They showed that the local
effect of the aerosols on the surface temperature is larger
for the online than for the ofﬂine simulations, although the
global effect is very similar.
Similarly, the stratospheric chemistry and, in particular,
ozone may be either computed or prescribed. When com-
puted, the REPROBUS and LMDZ models are coupled at
each time step to account for chemistry-climate interac-
tions. When prescribed, LMDZ is forced by day-time and
night-time ozone concentrations above the mid-strato-
sphere whereas it is forced by daily mean ozone ﬁelds
below. Indeed, ozone concentration exhibits a strong
diurnal cycle in the upper stratosphere and mesosphere.
Neglecting these diurnal variations leads to an overesti-
mation of the infra-red radiative cooling and therefore to a
cold bias in the atmosphere.
2.3 Land surface model: ORCHIDEE
ORCHIDEE
(ORganizing
Carbon
and
Hydrology
In
Dynamic EcosystEms) is a land-surface model that simu-
lates the energy and water cycles of soil and vegetation, the
terrestrial carbon cycle, and the vegetation composition
and distribution (Krinner et al. 2005). The land surface is
described as a mosaic of twelve plant functional types
(PFTs) and bare soil. The deﬁnition of PFT is based on
ecological parameters such as plant physiognomy (tree or
grass), leaves (needleleaf or broadleaf), phenology (ever-
green, summergreen or raingreen) and photosynthesis
pathways for crops and grasses (C3 or C4). Relevant bio-
physical and biogeochemical parameters are prescribed for
each PFT.
Exchanges of energy (latent, sensible, and kinetic
energy) and water, between the atmosphere and the bio-
sphere are based on the work of Ducoudre´ et al. (1993) and
de Rosnay and Polcher (1998) and they are computed with
a 30-min time step together with the exchange of carbon
during photosynthesis. The soil water budget in the stan-
dard version of ORCHIDEE is done with a two-layer
bucket model (de Rosnay and Polcher 1998). The water
that is not inﬁltrated or drained at the bottom of the soil is
transported through rivers and aquifers (d’Orgeval et al.
2008). This routing scheme allows the re-evaporation of
the water on its way to the ocean through ﬂoodplains or
irrigation (de Rosnay et al. 2003).
The exchanges of water and energy at the land surface
are interlinked with the exchange of carbon. The vegetation
state (i.e. foliage density, interception capacity, soil-water
stresses) is computed dynamically within ORCHIDEE
(Krinner et al. 2005) and accounts for carbon assimilation,
carbon
allocation
and
senescence
processes.
Carbon
exchange at the leaf level during photosynthesis is based on
Farquhar et al. (1980) and Collatz et al. (1992) for C3 and
C4 photosynthetic pathways, respectively. Concomitant
water exchange through transpiration is linked to photo-
synthesis via the stomatal conductance, following the for-
mulation of Ball et al (1987). Photosynthesis is computed
with a 30-min time step while carbon allocation in the
different soil-plant reservoirs is performed with a daily
time step.
The PFT distribution is fully prescribed in the simula-
tions presented in this article. The relative distribution of
natural PFTs within each grid cell is prescribed by using
PFT distribution maps where only the fractions of crop-
lands and total natural lands per grid cell vary at a yearly
time step. The elaboration of these maps is detailed in the
Sect. 3.7 below.
When coupled, both LMDZ and ORCHIDEE models
have the same spatial resolution and time step. The cou-
pling procedure for heat and water ﬂuxes uses an implicit
approach as described in Marti et al. (2010).
2.4 Ocean and sea-ice
The ocean and sea-ice component is based on NEMOv3.2
(Nucleus for European Modelling of the Ocean, Madec
2008), which includes OPA for the dynamics of the
ocean, PISCES for ocean biochemistry, and LIM for sea-
ice dynamics and thermodynamics. The conﬁguration is
ORCA2 (Madec and Imbard 1996), which uses a tri-polar
global grid and its associated physics. South of 40N, the
grid is an isotropic Mercator grid with a nominal resolution
of 2. A latitudinal grid reﬁnement of 0.5 is used in the
tropics. North of 40N the grid is quasi-isotropic, the North
Pole singularity being mapped onto a line between points
in Canada and Siberia. In the vertical 31 depth levels are
used (with thicknesses from 10 m near the surface to
500 m at 5,000 m).
2128
J.-L. Dufresne et al.
123
2.4.1 Oceanic GCM: NEMO-OPA
NEMOv3.2 takes advantage of several improvements over
OPA8.2, which was used in IPSL-CM4. It uses a partial
step formulation (Barnier et al. 2006), which ensures a
better representation of bottom bathymetry and thus stream
ﬂow and friction at the bottom of the ocean. Advection of
temperature and salinity is computed using a total variance
dissipation scheme (Le´vy et al. 2001; Cravatte et al. 2007).
An energy and enstrophy conserving scheme is used in the
momentum equation (Arakawa and Lamb 1981; Le Som-
mer et al. 2009). The mixed layer dynamics is parameter-
ized using the Turbulent Kinetic Energy (TKE) closure
scheme of Blanke and Delecluse (1993) improved by
Madec (2008). Improvements include a double diffusion
process (Merryﬁeld et al. 1999), Langmuir cells (Axell
2002) and the contribution of surface wave breaking
(Mellor and Blumberg 2004; Burchard and Rennau 2008).
A parameterization of bottom intensiﬁed tidal-driven
mixing similar to Simmons et al. (2004) is used in com-
bination with a speciﬁc tidal mixing parameterization in
the Indonesian region (Koch-Larrouy et al. 2007; 2010).
NEMOv3.2 also includes representation of the interaction
between incoming shortwave radiation into the ocean and
the phytoplankton (Lengaigne et al. 2009).
The horizontal eddy viscosity coefﬁcient (ahm) value is
4.104 m2.s-1 and the lateral eddy diffusivity coefﬁcient
(aht) value is 103 m2.s-1. The coefﬁcient ahm reduces to
aht in the tropics, except along western boundaries. The
tracer diffusion is along isoneutral surfaces. A Gent and
Mcwilliams (1990) term is applied in the advective for-
mulation. Its coefﬁcient is computed from the local growth
rate of baroclinic instability. It decreases in the 20S–20N
band and vanishes at the equator. At the ocean ﬂoor, there
is a linear bottom friction with a coefﬁcient of 4.10-4, and
a background bottom turbulent kinetic energy of 2.5 10-3
m2.s-2. The model has a Beckmann and Do¨scher (1997)
diffusive bottom boundary layer scheme with a value of
104 m2. s-1. A spatially varying geothermal ﬂux is applied
at the bottom of the ocean (Emile-Geay and Madec 2009)
with a global mean value of 86.4 mW.m-2.
2.4.2 Sea ice: NEMO-LIM2
LIM2 (Louvain-la-Neuve Sea Ice Model, Version 2) is a
two-level thermodynamic-dynamic sea ice model (Fichefet
and Morales Maqueda 1997, 1999). Sensible heat storage
and vertical heat conduction within snow and ice are
determined by a three-layer model. The storage of latent
heat inside the ice, which results from the trapping of
shortwave radiation by brine pockets, is taken into account.
The surface albedo is parameterized as a function of sur-
face temperature and snow and ice thicknesses. Vertical
and lateral growth/decay rates of ice are obtained from
prognostic energy budgets at both the bottom and surface
boundaries of the snow-ice cover and in leads. For the
momentum balance, sea ice is considered as a two-
dimensional continuum in dynamical interaction with the
atmosphere and ocean. The viscous-plastic constitutive law
proposed by Hibler (1979) is used for computing the
internal ice force. The ice strength is a function of ice
thickness and compactness. The advected physical ﬁelds
are the ice concentration, the snow and ice volume,
enthalpy, and the brine reservoir. The sea ice and ocean
models have the same horizontal grid.
2.4.3 Ocean carbon cycle: NEMO-PISCES
PISCES (Pelagic Interaction Scheme for Carbon and
Ecosystem Studies) (Aumont and Bopp 2006) simulates
the cycling of carbon, oxygen, and the major nutrients
determining phytoplankton growth (phosphate, nitrate,
ammonium, iron and silicic acid). The carbon chemistry
of the model is based on the Ocean Carbon Model
Intercomparison Project (OCMIP2) protocol (Najjar et al.
2007) and the parameterization proposed by Wanninkhof
(1992) is used to compute air-sea gas exchange of CO2
and O2.
PISCES includes a simple representation of the marine
ecosystem with two phytoplankton size classes represent-
ing nanophytoplankton and diatoms, as well as two zoo-
plankton size classes representing microzooplankton and
mesozooplankton. Phytoplankton growth is limited by the
availability of nutrients, temperature, and light. There are
three non-living components of organic carbon in the
model: semi-labile dissolved organic carbon with a lifetime
of several weeks to a few years, as well as large and small
detrital particles, which are fuelled by mortality, aggrega-
tion, fecal pellet production and grazing. Biogenic silica
and calcite particles are also included.
Nutrients and/or carbon are supplied to the ocean from
three different sources: atmospheric deposition, rivers, and
sediment mobilization. These sources are explicitly inclu-
ded but do not vary in time apart from a climatological
seasonal cycle for the atmospheric input. Atmospheric
deposition (Fe, N, P and Si) has been estimated from the
INCA model (Aumont et al. 2008). River discharge of
carbon and nutrients is taken from Ludwig et al. (1996).
Iron input from sediment mobilization has been parame-
terized as in Aumont and Bopp (2006).
PISCES is used here to compute air-sea ﬂuxes of carbon
and also the effect of a biophysical coupling: the chloro-
phyll concentration produced by the biological component
retroacts on the ocean heat budget by modulating the
absorption of light as well as the oceanic heating rate (see
Lengaigne et al. (2007) for a detailed description).
IPSL-CM5 Earth System Model
2129
123
2.4.4 Atmosphere–Ocean–Sea ice coupling
The Atmosphere/Ocean/Sea ice coupling in IPSL-CM5 is
very similar yet improved compared to the coupling used in
IPSL-CM4 (Marti et al. 2010). The atmospheric model has
a fractional land-sea mask, each grid box being divided
into four sub-surfaces corresponding to land surface, free
ocean, sea ice and glaciers. The OASIS coupler (Valcke
2006) is used to interpolate and exchange the variables and
to synchronize the models. Since a comprehensive model
of glacier and land-ice is not yet included, the local snow
mass is limited to 3,000 kg.m2 to avoid inﬁnite accumu-
lation, and the snow mass above this limit is sent as
‘‘calving’’ to the ocean. The coupling and the interpolation
procedures ensure local conservation of energy and water,
avoiding the need of any transformation to conserve these
global quantities. One improvement compared to Marti
et al. (2010) consists in the daily mean velocity of the
ocean surface being now sent to the atmosphere and used
as boundary conditions for the atmospheric boundary layer
scheme.
2.5 Model tuning
GCMs include many parameterizations, which are approxi-
mate descriptions of sub-grid processes. These parameter-
izations are formulated via a series of parameters that are
usually not directly observable and must be tuned so that
the parameterizations ﬁt as well as possible the statistical
behavior of the physical processes. Therefore the tuning
process is a fundamental aspect of climate model devel-
opment. It is usually performed at different stages: for
individual parameterizations, for individual model com-
ponents (atmosphere, ocean, land surface,. . .) and for the
full coupled climate model. This tuning process is non-
linear. It includes iterations among these three stages and it
inherits from successive tunings performed separately
on the individual components or on coupled model along
years of model development.
In coupled models with no ﬂux adjustment, one
important variable is the net heat budget of the Earth sys-
tem, which has to be close to zero (i.e. within a few tenths
of Wm-2) in order to avoid a major temperature drift. The
observed present-day top of the atmosphere (TOA) energy
budget shows a small imbalance of about 0.9 ± 0.3Wm-2
(Hansen et al. 2011; Lyman et al. 2010; Stevens and
Schwartz 2012; Trenberth and Fasullo 2012). This imbal-
ance, which is due to recent changes in atmospheric
composition and to the ocean thermal inertia, leads to the
current global warming. A perfect climate model run with
the current atmospheric composition and initialized with
present-day conditions should produce
a comparable
imbalance and should drift naturally toward a warmer
climate. Therefore there is no obvious choice on how to
simulate an equilibrium global temperature close to current
observations. Performing control runs with present-day
conditions requires making some ad hoc adaptations. We
have chosen to compensate the oceanic heat uptake by
uniformly increasing the albedo of the oceanic surface by
0.01 during (and only during) this tuning phase. Most runs
performed in this phase covered a few decades and only a
few of them were extended to a few centuries. No historical
runs were performed and no adjustment was made to
speciﬁcally reproduce the temperature increase which has
been observed for a few decades.
The following adjustments were made for the IPSL-
CM5A-LR model. For the atmospheric model, the ﬁnal
tuning of the global energy balance was achieved by con-
sidering a sub-set of three parameters of the cloud
parameterizations (Hourdin et al. 2013a): two upper clouds
parameters (maximum precipitation efﬁciency of the deep
convection scheme and fall velocity of the ice cloud par-
ticles) and one parameter related to the conversion of cloud
water to rainfall in the large-scale cloud scheme. In addi-
tion to the global energy balance, particular attention was
given to the partitioning between SW and LW radiative
ﬂuxes and between clear sky and all sky radiative ﬂuxes.
The mean values, zonal distribution, and partition between
convective and subsiding regimes in the tropics were
considered.
In addition to the global energy balance, some other
aspects were also considered during the ﬁnal tuning. For
the land-surface model, the soil depth was increased from
2- to 4-m to reduce the strong underestimation of the leaf
area index (LAI) and of the carbon pools in the north-
eastern Amazon and in other tropical regions. The soil
depth increase allows for greater seasonal soil water
retention and reduces these biases. For the ocean, the new
TKE parameterization has been tuned to reduce the error of
the modeled mixed layer depth pattern and to obtain the
best match with observations for the sea surface tempera-
ture (SST) pattern.
As shown later in Sect. 4.2, the IPSL-CM5A-LR his-
torical runs show a cold bias of about 1 K compared to
present-day observations. This bias is due to the fact that
during the tuning phase the oceanic model was far from
equilibrium and the aerosols, volcanoes, and ozone forc-
ings did not reach their ﬁnal values. When this problem
was identiﬁed it was too late to rerun the whole set of
simulations within the CMIP5 schedule. A better method-
ology than the one used here would probably have been to
perform the ﬁnal tunings in order to reach a net heat budget
equilibrium with the global mean pre-industrial tempera-
ture even though this temperature is not precisely known.
With the same parameters as in the IPSL-CM5A-LR
version, the medium-resolution IPSL-CM5A-MR version
2130
J.-L. Dufresne et al.
123
was producing a mean temperature warmer by only a few
tenths of a degree. It was thus decided to reduce the mean
temperature bias in this conﬁguration with a uniform 0.01
increase of the solar absorption coefﬁcient in the ocean.
For the IPSL-CM5B-LR model, all components and
parameter values are the same as in the IPSL-CM5A-LR
model except for the atmospheric component, which is now
LMDZ5B (Hourdin et al. 2013b). The radiative ﬂux at the
TOA has been adjusted using the same methodology and
tuning parameters as for IPSL-CM5A. However the net
radiative ﬂux at the TOA is not zero even at equilibrium
because the energy is not fully conserved in the atmospheric
model LMDZ5B: the difference between the net ﬂux at the
TOA and at the surface is about -0.71Wm-2 in IPSL-
CM5B-LR and about 0.01 Wm-2 in IPSL-CM5A-LR.
3 Experiments, model conﬁgurations and forcings
for CMIP5
3.1 The CMIP5 experimental protocol
The CMIP5 project (Taylor et al. 2012) has been designed
to address a much wider range of scientiﬁc questions than
CMIP3 (Meehl et al. 2005), requiring a wider spectrum of
models, conﬁgurations, and experiments. Here we only
report on the long-term experiments. They include a few-
centuries long pre-industrial control simulation, the his-
torical simulations (1850–2005), and the future projections
simulations (2006–2100, 2006–2300). The future projec-
tions are performed under the new scenarios proposed by
CMIP5, the RCP (Representative Concentration Pathway)
scenarios (Moss et al. 2010; van Vuuren et al. 2011), each
labeled according to the approximate value of the radiative
forcing (in Wm-2) at the end of the twenty-ﬁrst century:
RCP 2.6, RCP 4.5, RCP 6.0 and RCP 8.5. The RCPs are
supplemented with extensions (Extended Concentration
Pathways, ECPs) until year 2300 without reference to
speciﬁc underlying societal, technological or population
scenarios (Meinshausen et al. 2011). As in Taylor et al.
(2012) we refer to both RCPs and ECPs as RCPs in the
remainder of this paper. CMIP5 also included simulations
with idealized forcings (1 % year CO2 increase, 4 times
CO2 abrupt increase), forcings corresponding to prescribed
or idealized sea-surface conditions (e.g. observed SST,
aqua-planet), forcings representative of speciﬁc paleo-cli-
mate periods, and others. The total length of all these
simulations is a few thousands of years. This of course calls
for optimizations and compromises between the available
computing time and the simulations’ degrees of complex-
ity. Our general strategy has been to run the atmospheric
component of the ESM at a rather low resolution and to
treat some of the atmospheric chemistry and transport
processes controlling the greenhouse gases and the aerosols
outside the ESM in a semi-ofﬂine way.
3.2 Model horizontal resolution
In the standard version of the IPSL-CM4 model used for
CMIP3, the atmospheric model has 72 points in longitude
and 96 points in latitude, corresponding to a resolution of
3.75 9 2.5. For CMIP5 a rather coarse resolution was
used, which allows for the coverage of most of the long
term simulations in a reasonable amount of time. A com-
putationally affordable model is also helpful to obtain an
initial state of the climate system close to equilibrium,
which requires multi-century runs particularly when the
carbon cycle is included.
A systematic exploration of the impact of the atmo-
spheric grid conﬁguration on the simulated climate was
conducted with IPSL-CM4 by (Hourdin et al. 2013a). They
found that the grid reﬁnement has a strong impact on the jet
locations and on the pronounced mid latitude cold bias,
which was one of the major deﬁciencies of the IPSL-CM4
model. The impact of grid reﬁnement on the jets location
was also studied by Guemas and Codron (2011) in an
idealized dynamical-core setting. They found that an
increase of the resolution in latitude produced a poleward
shift of the jet because an enhanced baroclinic wave
activity brought more momentum from the Tropics. An
increased resolution in longitude produced no such shift
because a tendency towards more cyclonic wave breaking
canceled the increase of wave activity in that case. The
errors associated with the equatorward jet position could
thus be reduced at moderate computational cost by
increasing the resolution in latitude more than in longitude.
Based on these results two grids were used for CMIP5.
They have almost the same number of points in longitude
and latitude so that the meshes are isotropic (dx = dy) at
latitude 60 and dx = 2dy at the equator. At Low Reso-
lution (LR), the model has 96 9 95 points corresponding
to a resolution of 3.75 9 1.875 in longitude and latitude
respectively and at Medium Resolution (MR) the model
has 144 9 143 points, corresponding to a resolution of
2.5 9 1.25.
3.3 Ozone concentrations
Interannual ozone variations are considered in the IPSL-
CM5 simulations for CMIP5. This was not the case in the
IPSL-CM4 simulations for CMIP3 for which the model
was only forced with a constant seasonally-varying ozone
ﬁeld. Nevertheless this interannually varying ozone cannot
be routinely computed online using the very comprehen-
sive aerosols and chemistry coupled models (Sects. 2.2.2
and 2.2.3) in the IPSL ESM because they require a lot of
IPSL-CM5 Earth System Model
2131
123
computing time: LMDZ-INCA and LMDZ-REPROBUS
both need 50–100 tracers, and running these models
increases the CPU time by more than a factor of 10 com-
pared to the atmospheric model LMDZ alone.
To circumvent this difﬁculty, variations in ozone con-
centration shorter than a month even initially caused by
short-term climate variability were assumed to play a rel-
atively small, possibly negligible, role in the long-term
evolution of climate. This assumption has been shown to be
valid for stratospheric ozone (e.g. Son et al. 2010). On long
time scales stratospheric ozone is mostly inﬂuenced by
climate change via stratospheric cooling due to CO2
increase and tropospheric ozone is inﬂuenced by changes
in global mean temperature via the water vapor concen-
tration. These climate effects on ozone are accounted for in
chemistry
climate
models
run
with
prescribed
SST
(Fig. 1b). In turn the climate evolution depends on the
long-term changes in ozone concentration. The treatment
of the two-way interactions between ozone and climate can
thus be simpliﬁed by decoupling them using a semi-ofﬂine
approach instead of the fully coupled online approach.
This approach is fully described in Szopa et al. (2013)
and consists in specifying the ozone ﬁelds predicted by
dedicated atmospheric chemistry coupled model simula-
tions in the ESM. In order to do so, both the INCA and the
REPROBUS atmospheric chemistry models were used.
Since the RCP climate model simulations were not yet
available, the SST and sea ice concentrations prescribed in
the chemistry simulations were taken from existing his-
torical and scenario runs performed with the IPSL-CM4
model. We use the SST of the SRES-A2 scenario for the
RCP 8.5 simulation, the SST of the SRES-A1B scenario for
the RCP 6.0 simulation, the SST of the SRES-B1 scenario
for the RCP 4.5 simulation and the SST of the scenario E1
(Johns et al. 2011) for the RCP 2.6 simulation. The dif-
ferences between the prescribed SST and those obtained
with the RCP scenarios are not expected to strongly impact
the atmospheric chemistry. First, the LMDZ-INCA model
(Sect. 2.2.3) with 19 vertical levels has been used to gen-
erate time-varying 3D ﬁelds of ozone in the troposphere.
The simulations include decadal emissions of methane,
carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides and non methane
hydrocarbons for anthropogenic and biomass burning
emissions. They are taken from Lamarque et al. (2010) for
the historical period and from Lamarque et al. (2011) for
the RCP scenarios. Also, the monthly biogenic emissions
are from Lathie`re et al. (2005) and are kept constant over
the period. Second, the LMDZ-REPROBUS model (Sect.
2.2.2) with 50 vertical levels is used to generate time-
varying 3D ﬁelds of ozone in the stratosphere. Instead of
running all the scenarios, time-varying ozone ﬁelds for
some of the RCP scenarios are reconstructed by interpo-
lating or extrapolating linearly from the CCMVal REF-B2
and SCN-B2c scenarios (Morgenstern et al. 2010) using a
time-varying weighing coefﬁcient proportional to the CO2
level. This approach is based on the somewhat linear
dependence of stratospheric ozone changes on CO2 chan-
ges, which has been found in coupled chemistry models run
under the RCP scenarios (Eyring et al. 2010a, b). The
INCA
(tropospheric)
and
REPROBUS
(stratospheric)
ozone ﬁelds are then merged with a transition region cen-
tered on the tropopause region and averaged over longi-
tudes to produce time-varying zonally-averaged monthly-
mean ozone ﬁelds.
Figure 2 shows the total column ozone as a function of
latitude and time, from 1960 to 2100, for RCP 2.6 and RCP
6.0 scenarios, as well as for the ACC/SPARC ozone
dataset, which is the commonly used ozone climatology in
CMIP5 (Cionni et al. 2011; Eyring et al. 2012). The time
evolutions of the globally-averaged total column ozone in
the RCP 2.6, 4.5, 6.0 and 8.5 scenarios and in the ACC/
SPARC climatology are shown on Fig. 3. The evolutions
of column ozone as a function of latitude and time are
similar in our CMIP5 climatologies and in ACC/SPARC
climatology. From 1960 onwards, column ozone decreases
at all latitudes with smaller trends over the tropics and
largest trends over Antarctica. This evolution is mostly due
to the increase in ODSs (Ozone Depleting Substances) until
the end of the twentieth century. The pre-2000 ozone
decrease is followed by an increase with a rate that depends
on the RCP scenario and on the region.
There are three main differences between our CMIP5
ozone forcings and the ACC/SPARC dataset. First, the
Antarctic ozone hole is more pronounced in our dataset than
in the ACC/SPARC dataset. Second, although the decrease
in column ozone is stronger over Antarctica in our dataset,
the decline in global ozone during the end of the last century
is weaker (Fig. 3) indicating that the past tropical column
ozone declines less quickly in our climatology. Third, the
values of column ozone are generally higher in our dataset.
Globally-averaged total column ozone is about 10–18
DU higher in our RCP 6.0 climatology than in the ACC/
SPARC climatology (Fig. 3). The faster the growth in
GHG emissions (increasing from RCP 2.6 to RCP 8.5), the
stronger the rate of ozone increase is during the twenty-ﬁrst
century in our forcings. By 2030 or 2040, depending on the
RCP scenario, the 1960 levels in global column ozone are
reached in all forcings (Fig. 3). However from 2040
onward, the global ozone levels off in RCP 2.6, continues
to increase slightly in RCP 4.5 and RCP 6.0 and increase
quite sharply in RCP 8.5. The ozone super-recovery (i.e.
ozone levels exceeding the 1960s levels in the late twenty-
ﬁrst century) is most visible at mid-latitudes and at north-
ern high latitudes. The time evolution of the ACC/SPARC
global ozone resembles the evolution of our RCP 2.6 global
ozone. It is worth pointing out that much larger differences
2132
J.-L. Dufresne et al.
123
in column ozone have been found when comparing all the
climatologies used to force the CMIP5 simulations (Eyring
et al. 2012).
3.4 Aerosol concentrations
For CMIP5 the radiative impact of dust, sea salt, BC and
organic carbon aerosols are modeled in LMDZ following
De´andreis (2008) and Balkanski (2011). Again this is a
substantial improvement compared to the IPSL-CM4
model used for CMIP3 in which only the sulfate aerosols
were considered (Dufresne et al. 2005).
As for ozone, aerosol microphysics strongly depends on
weather and climate. However, there is no strong evidence
that short-term variations in aerosol concentration play a
signiﬁcant role in the long-term evolution of climate. The
treatment of the coupling between aerosols and climate can
again be simpliﬁed by using a semi-ofﬂine approach. For
the aerosols this approach is supported by De´andreis et al.
(2012) who made a careful comparison between online and
ofﬂine runs in the case of sulfate aerosols. They found little
differences in the model results between the two approa-
ches. Nevertheless, the short term variations of dust aero-
sols probably impact individual meteorological events.
This effect should be tested in a fully coupled environment.
The past and future evolutions of aerosol distribution are
computed using the LMDZ-INCA model (Sect. 2.2.3).
Anthropogenic and biomass burning emissions are pro-
vided by Lamarque et al. (2010) for the historical period,
and by Lamarque et al. (2011) for the RCP scenarios. Since
the IPSL-CM5 model has biases in surface winds, the
natural emissions of dust and sea salt are computed using
the 10 m wind components provided by ECMWF for 2006
and, consequently, have seasonal cycles but no inter-annual
variations. The computed monthly mean aerosol ﬁelds are
then smoothed with an 11-year running mean. The meth-
odology to build the aerosol ﬁeld as well as its evolution
and realism is described in more detail in Szopa et al.
(2013). In the ﬁrst release of these climatologies (used for
the IPSL-CM5A-LR simulations) the particulate organic
matter computation was underestimated by almost 20 %.
This induces a slight underestimation of the aerosol cooling
effect but additional simulations show that it has very little
impact on climate. There is no coupling between dust and
sea-salt emissions and climate via the surface winds.
Nonetheless, the couplings via the transport, the wet and
dry deposition and the forcing via land-use changes are
described in the model.
3.5 CO2 concentrations and emissions
In CMIP5, the models are driven by CO2 concentrations in
most of the runs and by CO2 emissions in some of them
Total ozone IPSL-CM5 and ACC-SPARC
1960
1980
2000
2020
2040
2060
2080
2100
years
280
290
300
310
320
330
O3 column (DU)
RCP8.5
RCP6.0
RCP4.5
RCP2.6
ACC-SPARC
Fig. 3 Time series of globally-averaged total column ozone (in
Dobson unit) from 1960 to 2100 for the IPSL-CM5 and ACC-SPARC
climatologies. IPSL RCP 2.6, RCP 4.5, RCP 6.0 and RCP 8.5 ozone
climatologies are shown with green, blue, red and brown solid lines
respectively. Only the RCP 6.0 ACC-SPARC climatology is shown
(purple solid line). All the data have been annually averaged and
smoothed with an 11-year running mean ﬁlter
Fig. 2 Zonal mean of the total column ozone (in Dobson unit) as a
function of latitude and time, from 1960 to 2100 for the IPSL-CM5
(top) and ACC-SPARC (bottom) climatologies. The RCP 6.0 scenario
is used for the future period (2006–2100). All the data have been
annually averaged and smoothed with an 11-year running mean ﬁlter
IPSL-CM5 Earth System Model
2133
123
(Taylor et al. 2012). These two classes of simulations can
both be performed with the full carbon-cycle conﬁguration
of the IPSL-CM5A-LR model (Fig. 1c, d). Unlike the
chemistry and aerosols models, the interactive carbon cycle
conﬁguration of the model is affordable to run. The main
difﬁculty lies in the estimation of the initial state of carbon
stocks, which requires very long runs to reach a steady-
state. Despite using some dedicated approaches to speed up
the spin-up, a few hundred years of model integration are
required in order for the various carbon pools to be close to
equilibrium and hence suitable for use as initial states.
For the non-interactive (i.e. ofﬂine) concentration-dri-
ven simulations from 1850 to 2300, CO2 being well mixed
in the atmosphere, the prescribed global CO2 concentration
is directly used by LMDZ to compute the radiative budget
and by the PISCES and ORCHIDEE models to compute
air-sea CO2 exchange and land photosynthesis respec-
tively. The prescribed evolution of CO2 concentrations is
taken from the CMIP5 recommended dataset and is
described in Meinshausen et al. (2011). For the historical
period 1850–2005, the CO2 concentration has been derived
from the Law Dome ice core record, the SIO Mauna Loa
record and the NOAA global-mean record. From 2006 and
onwards, CO2 emissions have been projected by four dif-
ferent Integrated Assessment Models (IAMs) (van Vuuren
et al. 2011), and corresponding CO2 concentrations have
been generated with the same reduced-complexity carbon
cycle-climate model MAGICC6 (Meinshausen et al. 2011).
In the RCP 2.6 scenario, CO2 concentration peaks at
440 ppmv in 2050 and then declines. In the RCP 6.0 and
RCP 4.5 scenarios, CO2 concentration stabilizes at 752 and
543 ppmv in 2150 respectively. In the RCP 8.5 scenario,
CO2 concentration reaches 935 ppmv in 2100 and contin-
ues to increase up to 1961 ppmv in 2250.
3.6 Other greenhouse gas concentrations
Other greenhouse gases (apart from ozone) are assumed to
be well mixed in the atmosphere and are prescribed as time
series of annual global mean mixing ratio. The concentra-
tions of CH4,N2O, CFC-11 and CFC-12 are directly pre-
scribed in the radiative code of LMDZ. The concentrations
are taken from the recommended CMIP5 dataset1 and are
described in Meinshausen et al. (2011). As the radiative
schemes of GCMs do not generally represent separately all
the ﬂuorinated gases emitted by human activities, the
radiative effects of all ﬂuorinated gases controlled under the
Montreal and Kyoto protocols are represented in terms of
concentrations of ’’equivalent CFC-12’’ and ’’equivalent
HFC-134a’’respectively. The ’’equivalent CFC-12’’ con-
centration
is
directly
used
in
LMDZ
whereas
the
’’equivalent HFC-134a’’ is converted in ’’equivalent CFC-
11’’ prior to being used. For this conversion, the radiative
efﬁciency of the two gases are used: 0.15 W.m-2.ppb-1 for
HFC-134a and 0.25 W.m-2.ppb-1 for CFC-11 (Ramasw-
amy et al. 2001, Table 6.7).
3.7 Land use changes
We use the transient historical and future crop and pasture
datasets developed by Hurtt et al. (2011) (hereafter referred
to as the UNH dataset) for both the historical period and the
4 RCPs scenarios for the future period. All the information
is provided on 0.5 9 0.5 horizontal grid.
Those datasets provide information on human activities
(crop land and grazed pastureland) in each grid-cell but do not
provide speciﬁc information on the characteristics of the
natural vegetation. Moreover, the information provided can-
not be directly used by land surface models embedded within
GCMs like ORCHIDEE. The land-cover map used for both
the historical and future period has been obtained starting from
an observed present-day land-cover map (Loveland et al.
2000), which already includes both natural and anthropogenic
vegetation types with the following methodology.
Firstly, the area covered by crops per year and per grid-
cell is set to the value provided by the UNH dataset. The
expansion of this crop area occurs at the expense of all
natural vegetation types proportionally. This means that the
percent by which natural grasses and tree areas are reduced
is the same for all biomes/PFTs. Conversely, a reduction of
anthropogenic area implies a proportional increase in all
natural vegetation types which exist in any given grid-cell.
If no information is available on the natural distribution of
vegetation at a speciﬁc location (i.e. 100 % anthropogenic
on the original land-cover map used), the nearest point
which has natural vegetation is searched and this vegeta-
tion is introduced. Finally, the extent covered by desert in
each grid-cell is unchanged from pre-industrial times until
the end of the twenty-ﬁrst century. We only encroach on
desert if the anthropogenic area is larger than the natural
vegetation part of the grid-cell.
After this ﬁrst step where the change in crop area has
been handled, the remaining area is a combination of nat-
ural vegetation and grazing activities. Grazing activities
were included as follows: if the grazed area is smaller than
the area covered with grasses and shrubs, no further change
to the land-cover map has been made. If the grazed area is
larger than the area covered with grasses and shrubs, part of
the forested area is removed.
3.8 Solar irradiance and volcanic aerosols
The IPSL model is directly forced by the annual mean of
solar irradiance using the data recommended by CMIP5
1 see http://cmip-pcmdi.llnl.gov/cmip5/forcing.html.
2134
J.-L. Dufresne et al.
123
(Lean 2009; Lean et al. 2005). For the past, the estimate of
the total solar irradiance (TSI) variations is the sum of two
terms, the ﬁrst is related to an estimate of the past solar
cycles (Fro¨hlich and Lean 2004) and the second to an
estimate of long term variations (Wang et al. 2005). For the
future, it is assumed that there is no long term variation but
repeated solar cycles identical to the last cycle (cycle 23),
i.e. with solar irradiance values from 1996 to 2008 (Fig. 4,
continuous line). For other than historical and scenario
simulations, the TSI is held constant and equal to the mean
TSI estimate between the years 1845 and 1855, i.e. 1365.7
Wm-2 (Fig. 4, dashed line).
The volcanic radiative forcing is accounted for by an
additional change to the solar constant. For the historical
period, the aerosol optical depth of volcanic aerosol is an
updated version of Sato et al. (1993, 516 http://data.giss.
nasa.gov/modelforce/strataer/). The aerosol optical depth s
is converted to radiative forcing Fv (Wm-2) according to
the relationship Fv = - 23 s suggested by Hansen et al.
(2005). The average value Fv of this forcing over the period
1860-2000 is -0.25 Wm-2, and the solar forcing F pre-
scribed to the model is:
F ¼ TSI þ 4ðFv  FvÞ
1  a
ð1Þ
where a = 0.31 is the planetary albedo. For the future
scenarios, the volcanic forcing is assumed to be constant,
i.e. a constant volcanic eruption produces a constant radi-
ative forcing Fv ¼ Fv. This explains the jump of F between
2005 and 2006 (Fig. 4, continuous line); in 2005 there is
almost no volcanic aerosols, as observed, whereas in 2006
a constant volcanic eruption takes place that produces a
constant radiative forcing.
4 Recent warming and current climate
The initial state and the simulation of some key climatic
variables in the control and in the historical runs are
described in this Section. Three versions of the IPSL-CM5
model are currently used for CMIP5: IPSL-CM5A-LR,
which has been extensively used to perform large ensem-
bles of runs, IPSL-CM5A-MR, which has a higher hori-
zontal resolution of the atmosphere (1.25 9 2.5, see
Sect. 3.2) and IPSL-CM5B-LR for which the atmospheric
parameterizations have been modiﬁed (see Sect. 2.2.1). A
comparison with results from the IPSL-CM4 model, which
has been used for CMIP3 (Dufresne et al. 2005) and whose
key climatic characteristics have been presented in Bra-
connot et al. (2007) and Marti et al. (2010) is also pre-
sented in this Section.
For the IPSL-CM5A-LR model, many other aspects of
the simulated climate are presented in companion papers
such as the global climatology (Hourdin et al. 2013a),
cloud properties (Konsta et al. 2013), land-atmosphere
interactions (Cheruy et al. 2013), tropical variability (Maury
et al. 2013; Duvel et al. 2013), mid-latitude variability
(Gastineau et al. 2013; Vial et al. 2013; Cattiaux et al.
2013), climate over Europe (Menut et al. 2013), the
AMOC bi-decadal variability in (Escudier et al. 2013),
predictability in perfect model framework (Persechino
et al. 2013) and over the last 60 years (Swingedouw et al.
2013).
4.1 Initial state and control run
The initial state of the IPSL-CM5A-LR model was
obtained in four steps. First, a 2,500-year long simulation
of the oceanic model without carbon cycle where the
atmospheric conditions are imposed and correspond to the
version 2 of the Coordinated Ocean-ice Reference Exper-
iments data sets (Large and Yeager 2009) was achieved.
Second, the full carbon-cycle conﬁguration of the IPSL-
CM5A-LR model was integrated for a period of 600 years
with the solar constant and the concentrations of GHGs and
aerosols corresponding to their pre-industrial values. Third,
because this last simulation is too short for the ocean and
biosphere carbon pools to reach equilibrium, ofﬂine sim-
ulations a few thousand year-long with the ocean and land
carbon cycle models (ORCHIDEE and PISCES) were
conducted separately. These ofﬂine simulations were
forced by the atmospheric and oceanic variables from the
preceding 600-year simulation and by a constant pre-
industrial value for the atmospheric CO2. Fourth, and once
the carbon pools are equilibrated, their values are included
back into the complete IPSL-CM5A-LR model, which is
again integrated for another 400 years. At this time, carbon
pools are close to equilibrium in the coupled model as well.
1850
1900
1950
2000
2050
2100
year
1350
1355
1360
1365
1370
Irradiance (W/m²)
solar + volcanoes
solar
reference value
Fig. 4 Time evolution of the total solar irradiance with (solid line)
and without (dashed line) volcanic eruptions. Also reported is the
reference value used for all the runs except the historical and the
scenario runs (dotted line)
IPSL-CM5 Earth System Model
2135
123
This long integration is used as initial state for the control
pre-industrial simulations.
To illustrate the stability of the IPSL-CM5A-LR control
run, Fig. 5 shows the global average values of a few
variables during the ﬁrst 1,000 years of this run. The sur-
face temperature has almost no drift and the heat budget is
close to zero. There is no discernible difference between
the ﬂux at the TOA and at the surface, which means that
the internal heat budget of the atmosphere is conserved.
The small imbalance in the heat budget at the TOA (about
0.25 Wm-2) is due to a small non conservation of energy in
the sea-ice model, the ocean model and at their interface.
The surface salinity has almost no drift, nor has the sea
surface height (about 2 cm/century, not shown), conﬁrming
that the water cycle is closed. Also, there is no drift of the
carbon ﬂux over land and there is a small drift of the
carbon ﬂux over oceans, which begins at 0.4 PgC/year and
decreases to less than 0.1 PgC/year at the end of the 1,000-
year period.
The initial state of IPSL-CM5A-MR was obtained
starting from the initial state of the IPSL-CM5A-LR con-
trol run. After a 300-year long run with the full carbon-
cycle conﬁguration of IPSL-CM5A-MR, only the carbon
cycle over land was not in equilibrium. A few thousand
year long ofﬂine simulation with the land carbon cycle
model was performed to bring the biosphere carbon pools
to equilibrium. Finally the complete IPSL-CM5A-MR
model was integrated again for another 200 years to obtain
the initial state of the control simulation.
The initial state of IPSL-CM5B-LR was obtained start-
ing from the initial state of IPSL-CM5A-LR control run
and by performing a 280-year long simulation. Although
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Fig. 5 Time evolution of a the
global mean heat budget at
surface and at the TOA, b the
global mean surface air
temperature, c the sea-ice
volume in the northern (black)
and southern (red) hemispheres,
d the global mean surface
salinity and e the carbon ﬂux
(PgC/year) over ocean (black)
and over land (red), for the ﬁrst
1,000 years of the control run in
the IPSL-CM5A-LR model. The
data are smoothed using a
11-year Hanning ﬁlter
2136
J.-L. Dufresne et al.
123
the full carbon-cycle conﬁguration is used in IPSL-CM5B-
LR, this spin-up period is not long enough for the carbon
pools to reach an equilibrium. The carbon variables are
therefore not relevant for this model version. They have not
been made available on the CMIP5 data base and will not
be discussed in this paper.
4.2 Twentieth century temperature
Figure 6a displays the time evolution of the global mean
air surface temperature from observations (Hadcrut3v
dataset, Jones et al. 1999; Hadcrut3v dataset, Brohan et al.
2006) and simulated by the IPSL-CM4 which participated
in CMIP3, the IPSL-CM5A-LR, the IPSL-CM5A-MR, and
the IPSL-CM5B-LR models. On this ﬁgure, the IPSL-
CM5A and IPSL-CM5B simulations include all the
anthropogenic and natural forcings as described in Sect. 3
whereas the IPSL-CM4 simulation only includes the GHGs
and sulfate aerosol forcings with no natural forcing (Duf-
resne et al. 2005). As expected all the historical simula-
tions indicate a substantial global warming induced by
increased greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere.
For all models the global trend and multi-annual variability
agree rather well with observations but the warming trend
simulated during recent decades (e.g. from 1960 onwards)
by most of the model conﬁgurations seems exaggerated.
To extract the temperature trends more accurately, the
monthly temperature time series from the simulations and
from the observations were subjected to the STL (Sea-
sonal-Trend decomposition procedure based on Loess)
additive scheme, which is a powerful statistical technique
for describing a time series (Cleveland et al. 1990). The
STL is a ﬁltering procedure where the analyzed X(t)
monthly time series is decomposed into three terms:
XðtÞ ¼ TðtÞ þ AðtÞ þ RðtÞ
ð2Þ
The T(t) term quantiﬁes the trend and low-frequency
variations in the time series. The A(t) term describes the
annual cycle and its modulation through time. Finally the
R(t) term contains the interannual signal and the noise
present in the data. As demonstrated by Morissey (1990) or
Terray (2011), this procedure is particularly useful to
extract the interannual and trend signals from non-
stationary and noisy climate datasets. Here the grid-box
temperature time series are ﬁrst expressed as monthly
anomalies with respect to the 1961–1990 climatology
before computing the global area-averaged time series and
running the STL statistical procedure.
The trends estimated using the STL decomposition
appear very clearly on Fig. 6-b. The simulations performed
with IPSL-CM5 (A-LR, A-MR and B-LR) are closer to
observations than the simulations performed with IPSL-
CM4. This was expected because the IPSL-CM5 models
include more realistic forcings than the IPSL-CM4 model.
For example, the IPSL-CM4 simulation does not reproduce
the two cold periods observed around 1910 and 1960. The
IPSL-CM5 models simulate the cooling around 1960 but
the 1910s cooling is simulated too early. These improve-
ments in the new model version essentially come from the
inclusion of the volcanic forcing. However IPSL-CM5A
simulates a larger temperature increase than IPSL-CM4
after 1970 compared to observations although both models
have a similar climate sensitivity (Sect. 6.1). During this
period the difference is probably due to the changes in
(a)
(b)
Fig. 6 a Time evolution of the global mean air surface temperature
anomaly as observed (Hadcrut3v dataset, black) and simulated by the
IPSL-CM5A-LR (light blue), the IPSL-CM5A-MR (blue), the IPSL-
CM5B-LR (magenta) and the IPSL-CM4 (green) models. The
temperatures are smoothed using a 5-year Hanning ﬁlter b Trends
of the same variable estimated from the global area-averaged
temperature anomalies monthly time series as deﬁned by the STL
procedure (see text). The unit is K and the temperature anomalies are
computed with respect to the 1961-1990 period. Note that 5 members
are available for IPSL-CM5A-LR, 2 members are available for IPSL-
CM5A-MR, and only 1 member is available for IPSL-CM5B-LR and
IPSL-CM4. On panel a the averaged value of these members is shown
for clarity whereas on panel, b the trends have been estimated
separately in each simulation member and each of these trends is
shown
IPSL-CM5 Earth System Model
2137
123
ozone and absorbing aerosol concentrations, both of them
increasing signiﬁcantly after 1950.
For the IPSL-CM5A model, there is almost no differ-
ence between the low- and mid-resolution conﬁgurations
(LR and MR). The differences between those simulations
are within the range of internal variability. IPSL-CM5B-
LR exhibits a much smaller temperature increase after
1970 than IPSL-CM5A and this difference further increa-
ses in the future period (Sect. 5.1). The IPSL-CM5B-LR
model has a much smaller climate sensitivity than the other
model versions as will be shown in Sect. 6.1 and this is
probably the main reason for this smaller temperature
increase.
Compared to the observed temperature (Hadcrut3v
dataset, Jones et al. 1999; Hadcrut3v dataset, Brohan et al.
2006) over the period 1961–1990, the models have the
following biases on average: -0.7 K for IPSL-CM4,
-1.4 K for IPSL-CM5A-LR, -0.4 K for IPSL-CM5A-MR
and -0.6 K for IPSL-CM5B-LR. The geographical struc-
ture of the temperature bias shows common patterns for
IPSL-CM4, IPSL-CM5A-LR and IPSL-CM5A-MR. The
amplitude of these biases is weakest in IPSL-CM5A-MR
(Fig. 7), it is slightly stronger in IPSL-CM5A-LR and it is
signiﬁcantly stronger in IPSL-CM4. In the Paciﬁc and
Atlantic tropical oceans there is a systematic bias with the
eastern part of the ocean basins being too warm compared
to the western part, which is a common weakness of cou-
pled models. Over the Paciﬁc, another common bias is a
cold tongue along the equator. In the mid latitudes there is
a systematic cold bias whose amplitude is weaker in IPSL-
CM5A-LR and MR than in IPSL-CM4. At high latitudes,
there is a warm bias over eastern Siberia, Alaska and
western Canada in the northern hemisphere and poleward
of 60S in the southern hemisphere. The geographical
pattern of the temperature bias does not change signiﬁ-
cantly on a seasonal scale.
The IPSL-CM5B-LR model displays a signiﬁcantly
different bias pattern compared to other models. There is
a strong asymmetry between the two hemispheres with a
large cold bias over most of the northern hemisphere and a
large warm bias in the southern hemisphere, particularly
poleward of 60S. In the tropics, this model exhibits an
east-west bias in the ocean basins but there is no cold
tongue over the equator. The temperatures in the tropics are
reasonable, which is not the case in the mid and high lat-
itude regions, probably due to an equatorward shift of the
mid-latitude jets. This shift, which is larger in IPSL-
CM5B-LR than in IPSL-CM5A-LR despite the same res-
olution (Hourdin et al. 2013b) is not yet understood. In the
Arctic region, IPSL-CM5B-LR is about 4C colder than
IPSL-CM5A-LR in the AMIP simulations where the sea
surface temperature and the sea-ice fraction are prescribed.
Fig. 7 Geographical distribution of the bias in the annual mean air
surface
temperature
climatology
(with
respect
to
the
period
1961–1990) simulated by, from top to bottom, IPSL-CM4, IPSL-
CM5A-LR, IPSL-CM5A-MR and IPSL-CM5B-LR models, com-
pared to estimate from observations (Jones et al. 1999). The global
mean difference with observations is removed in order to focus on the
bias structure. This global mean difference is -0.7K for IPSL-CM4,
-1.4K for IPSL-CM5A-LR, -0.4K for IPSL-CM5A-MR and -0.6K
for IPSL-CM5B-LR. For all models, the climatology is computed
using the ﬁrst member of the historical run. The unit is K
2138
J.-L. Dufresne et al.
123
This difference is ampliﬁed by about 50 % in the coupled
simulations. Over the Antarctic, there is also a cold bias of
about 4C in the AMIP simulations and this cold bias
almost vanishes in the coupled simulations due to the
strong warming of the southern ocean (Fig. 7).
4.3 Tropical precipitation and tropical variability
The tropics are of primary importance for climate vari-
ability and climate sensitivity, and the improvement of the
simulation of the tropical climate has been a main goal of
IPSL for many years. A new convective scheme (Emanuel
1991) and cloud scheme (Bony and Emanuel 2001) were
introduced in the LMDZ4 atmospheric model (Hourdin
et al. 2006), leading to an improved simulated tropical
climate in the IPSL-CM4 model (Braconnot et al. 2007).
No major changes of the atmospheric parameterizations
were made in IPSL-CM5A compared to IPSL-CM4
whereas parameterizations were strongly modiﬁed in the
atmospheric
component
of
IPSL-CM5B
in
order
to
improve the representation of some processes that are
known to be important for the tropical climate such as:
boundary layer, convection and clouds processes (see Sect.
2.2.1). The impact of these developments on the mean
climate are documented in Hourdin et al. (2013b), in par-
ticular on the atmosphere-only conﬁguration. The mean
precipitation in the tropics and two major modes of tropical
variability, the El Nin˜o Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and
the Madden Julian Oscillation (MJO), simulated in the
different versions of the IPSL coupled model are described
here. These modes have a large impact on the tropical and
global circulation (e.g. Cassou 2008; e.g. Alexander et al.
2002; e.g. Maury et al. 2013) and their representation in
current climate models varies greatly (e.g. Guilyardi et al.
2009; e.g. Xavier et al. 2010).
4.3.1 Tropical mean precipitation
Figure 8 presents the 10-year (1990–1999) annual mean
rainfall from GPCP (Global Precipitation Climatology
Dataset) observations (Huffman et al. 2001) and for his-
torical simulations with the four versions of the IPSL model
(IPSL-CM4, IPSL-CM5A-LR, IPSL-CM5A-MR and IPSL-
CM5B-LR). The precipitation pattern is similar for all
model versions, which are able to qualitatively reproduce
the main observed structures. The same major biases are
present in all model conﬁgurations. In the tropics the
models show the so-called double Intertropical Conver-
gence Zone (ITCZ) structure with a ﬁrst realistic precipi-
tation maximum around 5N and a secondary maximum
around 5S, which is not observed. The monsoon rainfall
over West Africa and the Indian sub-continent does not
extend sufﬁciently to the north. In the southern subtropics
the models fail to simulate the large regions without rain
observed over the ocean. Over Africa and the Arabian
Peninsula on the contrary, the area with no rainfall is wider
than observed. Precipitation is systematically overestimated
in the Andes mountains and underestimated over the
Amazon region. The simulated rainfall is too strong on the
East tropical Indian Ocean compared to observations.
When focusing on the differences between model con-
ﬁgurations, the impact of horizontal grid reﬁnement from
CM5A-LR to CM5A-MR is particularly weak. It slightly
improves the representation of the Indian and West African
monsoons, which extend farther to the north, but it tends to
reinforce the double ITCZ structure.
Changing the cloud and convective physics from IPSL-
CM5A-LR to IPSL-CM5B-LR has a somewhat larger and
often opposite impact. The monsoons are more conﬁned in
CM5B-LR and the rainfall excess over the East tropical
ocean is even larger. The double ITCZ is less marked both
over the Paciﬁc and Atlantic Oceans. Also the South
Paciﬁc and Atlantic Convergence Zones (SPCZ and
SACZ), which are not well captured in the CM5A-LR and -
MR conﬁgurations, are much better simulated with the new
physical parameterizations.
4.3.2 Madden-Julian oscillation
When forced by prescribed SST, the LMDZ5B atmo-
spheric model simulates a much larger tropical rainfall
variability than LMDZ5A, which is in better agreement
with observations in particular in the location and spectral
range associated with the MJO (Hourdin et al. 2013b). A
more detailed analysis of the MJO in the IPSL-CM5A and
CM5B coupled models, which use these two atmospheric
models, is presented here. The differences between the
IPSL-CM5A-LR and CM5A-MR results are small and only
the former will be presented. We restrict our analysis to the
January-March period (JFM) because differences on the
simulated MJO between IPSL-CM5A and CM5B are
stronger during this season.
The large-scale convective perturbations associated with
the MJO are extracted using the Local Mode Analysis
(LMA, Goulet and Duvel 2000). The LMA is based on a
series of complex EOF (CEOF) computed on relatively
small time sections (every 5 days on a 120-day time win-
dow) of the outgoing longwave radiation (OLR) time ser-
ies. The ﬁrst complex eigenvector best characterizes (in
phase and amplitude) the intraseasonal ﬂuctuation for the
120-day time section. The corresponding percentage of
variance represents the degree of spatial organization of
this event. The LMA retains only maxima in the time series
of the percentage of variance. For JFM, the LMA extracts
41 events for 30 years of observations (NOAA OLR,
Liebmann and Smith 1996), 52 events for 30 years of the
IPSL-CM5 Earth System Model
2139
123
IPSL-CM5A-LR run and 34 events for 25 years of the
IPSL-CM5B-LR run. The average time-scale for these
events is roughly 40 days for all three datasets.
An average pattern is computed from the JFM events
having a percentage of variance above the annual aver-
age. This average pattern gives the amplitude and phase
Fig. 8 10-year (1990–1999)
annual mean rainfall (mm/day)
over the tropics in the GPCP
observations and simulated by
the IPSL-CM4, IPSL-CM5A-
LR, IPSL-CM5A-MR and
IPSL-CM5B-LR models (from
top to bottom)
2140
J.-L. Dufresne et al.
123
distributions that best represent the considered events. This
average pattern is shown on Fig. 9 for observations, IPSL-
CM5A-LR and IPSL-CM5B-LR. In the observations, the
intraseasonal variability is conﬁned between the equator
and 20S. From the phases of the average pattern (Fig. 9a)
we may deduce that on average, intraseasonal perturbations
propagate eastward with a nearly constant speed of about
5–6 ms-1 (considering the phase opposition between
roughly 90E and 180E and an average period of 40 days).
The IPSL-CM5A-LR model produces MJO events that are
conﬁned in the Indian Ocean and propagate eastward at
around 2 ms-1 only (Fig. 9b) over the eastern Indian
Ocean. The IPSL-CM5B-LR model produces perturbations
that are more centered on the Maritime Continent and
propagating at a speed of about 2.5 ms-1 (Fig. 9c) over the
eastern Indian Ocean and faster (around 4 ms-1) across
northern Australia. The longitudinal position of the main
MJO signal and the latitudinal position in the Indian ocean
are thus improved in IPSL-CM5B-LR. However the slow
propagation over the eastern Indian Ocean and the too
strong variability north of the equator in the Paciﬁc remain.
The ability of a model to represent organized convective
perturbations on a large scale is critical for a correct sim-
ulation of the intraseasonal variability (Bellenger et al.
2009; Xavier et al. 2010). The percentage of variance
measures the degree of large-scale organization of the in-
traseasonal variability. A large percentage of variance
means that the intraseasonal variability of the region is
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 9 Average intraseasonal OLR perturbation pattern for JFM,
a NOAA OLR, b IPSL-CM5A-LR and c IPSL-CM5B-LR: (colors
and stick length) Amplitude; (sticks angle) Relative phase with a
clockwise rotation with time and a full rotation for one period of
about 40 days; (contours) percentage of intraseasonal variance due to
large-scale organized perturbations (40, 50 and 60 % in bold)
IPSL-CM5 Earth System Model
2141
123
mostly due to large-scale organized perturbations and not
to local red noise (see Duvel et al. 2013). This percentage
of variance is larger in IPSL-CM5B than in IPSL-CM5A
but it is still smaller than in observations (contours on
Fig. 9).
4.3.3 El Nin˜o Southern Oscillation
The ENSO spatial structure for the 3 models as measured
by the SST standard deviation is compared to observations
in Fig. 10. For the simulations we used 200 years of
monthly outputs. The IPSL-CM5A and CM5B versions
produce a weaker ENSO SST variability (by about 0.3 K)
than the IPSL-CM4 model with a pattern which is in good
qualitative agreement with observations. The spurious
westward extension of the SST pattern is reduced in
CM5B-LR when compared to CM4 and CM5A-LR. The
three model versions underestimate the SST variability
along the South American coast, which is related to a
common warm bias in this region.
ENSO spectral characteristics are difﬁcult to estimate
from 200 years or shorter time series (Wittenberg 2009).
However spectra of the SST monthly anomalies over the
Nin˜o3 region (90W–150W and 5S–5N) are indicative
of an ENSO with longer periods in the later versions of
IPSL-CM. Spectral peaks around 3–3.5 years are visible
for IPSL-CM5A-LR and CM5B-LR whereas CM4 shows a
peak around 2.7 years (Fig. 11a). IPSL-CM5A-LR is in
good qualitative agreement with observations showing a
second spectral peak beyond 4 years. In addition ENSO is
characterized by a strong seasonal phase locking with a
peak in November–January and a minimum in April. This
seasonality is well reproduced by IPSL-CM4 but the new
versions fail at reproducing this feature. IPSL-CM5A-LR
shows a marked seasonality with a peak in May–June and a
minimum in October–November, whereas IPSL-CM5B-LR
hardly shows any seasonal variation (not shown).
A number of studies point to a dominant role of the
atmospheric GCMs in the simulation of ENSO (Guilyardi
et al. 2009; Kim and Jin 2011; Clement et al. 2011). The
main atmospheric feedbacks are evaluated following Lloyd
et al. (2011, 2012). The feedback between the east-west
SST gradient and wind speed (Bjerknes feedback) is
evaluated by the linear regression coefﬁcient between the
zonal wind stress anomaly in the Nin˜o4 region (160E-
150W and 5S- 5N) and the Nin˜o3 SST anomaly. The
heat ﬂux feedback is evaluated by the regression coefﬁcient
between Nin˜o3 heat ﬂux and SST anomalies. This feedback
is dominated by the shortwave and the latent heat ﬂuxes
and the former has a key role in explaining the spread of
Fig. 10 Standard deviations (K) of monthly SST anomalies with respect to the mean seasonal cycle for HadISST1 (1870–2008) (Rayner et al.
2003) and for 200 years of IPSL-CM4, IPSL-CM5A-LR and IPSL-CM5B-LR
2142
J.-L. Dufresne et al.
123
ENSO characteristics among models (Lloyd et al. 2012).
Figure 11b shows the process-based metrics associated to
these atmospheric feedbacks. For all the four process-based
metrics IPSL-CM5B-LR shows a better agreement with the
reanalysis than IPSL-CM4 and IPSL-CM5A-LR. Both the
Bjerknes and heat ﬂux feedbacks are stronger in IPSL-
CM5B-LR and closer to observations. In particular, the
stronger heat ﬂux feedback is due to a better simulated
latent feedback and to an improvement in the shortwave
feedback, which has the right sign compared to IPSL-CM4
and CM5A-LR but is much too weak compared to obser-
vations. This change in the shortwave feedback sign in the
Nin˜o3 region is due to an increased occurrence of con-
vective clouds that are responsible for a negative shortwave
feedback. This improvement in CM5B-LR is mostly
associated to the improved mean state in which the cold
tongue spurious westward extension bias is reduced (Sect.
4.2). In contrast IPSL-CM4 has permanent upwelling
conditions, which favor the subsidence regime and positive
values for the shortwave feedback (Guilyardi et al. 2009;
Lloyd et al. 2012). In summary, IPSL-CM5 (A and B)
simulate a weaker ENSO than IPSL-CM4 closer to the
observed amplitude and associated with a better represen-
tation of atmosphere feedbacks in IPSL-CM5B-LR.
5 Future climate changes
Projections of future climate changes are based on sce-
narios. The RCP scenarios used in CMIP5 are too different
from the SRES scenarios used in CMIP3 (Sect. 3.1) to
allow a direct comparison of CMIP3 and CMIP5 results for
the scenario experiments. In this section the results
obtained with the IPSL-CM5 models following the RCP
scenarios are discussed. The comparison between results
from one model, IPSL-CM5A-LR, following the SRES
scenarios and the very same model following the RCP
scenarios is also discussed.
5.1 Future warming projections using RCP scenarios
The global mean surface air temperature increase during
the ﬁrst three decades (2005–2035) is similar in the three
IPSL-CM5 models (Fig. 12a) and for all the RCP scenar-
ios. The temperature increase in the medium- and low-
resolution versions of the IPSL-CM5A model remains very
similar throughout the twenty-ﬁrst century. Starting around
2040 the IPSL-CM5B model simulates a smaller temper-
ature increase than the other model versions. The global
mean air surface temperature increase levels off in the
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
(a)
(b)
Fig. 11 a Normalized power
spectra of SST over the Nin˜o3
region for HadISST1 (black),
IPSL-CM4 (green), IPSL-
CM5A-LR (red) and IPSL-
CM5B-LR (blue). b Evaluation
of the Bjerknes and heat ﬂux
feedbacks. The two main
components of the latter, the
shortwave and latent heat ﬂux
feedbacks, are also shown. For
the feedback coefﬁcients, the
reference is ERA40
(1958–2001) and OAFlux
(1984–2004)
IPSL-CM5 Earth System Model
2143
123
middle of the century for the RCP 2.6 scenario and at the
end of the twenty-ﬁrst century for the RCP 4.5 scenario,
but it continues to increase for the RCP 6.0 and RCP 8.5
scenarios.
The prescribed aerosol concentration and the parameter-
izations of the aerosol direct and ﬁrst indirect effects are the
same in IPSL-CM5A and CM5B but their radiative effects
differ (Fig. 12b). The aerosol ﬁrst indirect effect is larger
in absolute value in IPSL-CM5B-LR compared to IPSL-
CM5A-LR probably because of the larger fraction of
low-levelcloudsinIPSL-CM5B-LRcomparedtoIPSL-CM5A-
LR. The aerosol direct effect is smaller in IPSL-CM5B-LR
compared to IPSL-CM5A-LR probably because a higher
cloud fraction reduces the direct effect of aerosols. Overall,
the total radiative effects of aerosols is slightly larger
(&0.1 Wm-2) in IPSL-CM5B-LR than in IPSL-CM5A-LR.
This partly contributes to the smaller global mean surface air
temperature increase in the IPSL-CM5B-LR model. How-
ever IPSL-CM5B-LR has a much smaller climate sensitivity
than the other model versions as discussed in Sect. 6.1 and
this is probably the main reason for the smaller temperature
increase in the late twentieth century.
As one may expect, the difference among scenarios
appears earlier for the net heat ﬂux at the TOA than for the
surface temperature. This is illustrated on Fig. 13 for the
IPSL-CM5A-LR model. The net heat ﬂux at the TOA
differs among scenarios starting in the early twenty-ﬁrst
century. These differences gradually become more pro-
nounced and start to affect the temperature evolution. At
the end of the twenty-third century, the difference in global
mean annual temperature is 11C between the scenario
with the highest radiative forcing (RCP 8.5) and the sce-
nario with the lowest radiative forcing (RCP 2.6). For the
low RCP 2.6 scenario, the radiative forcing decreases and
the temperature is almost constant from 2050 onward. It
slightly decreases despite a positive net ﬂux at the TOA
due to the heat uptake by the ocean (not shown).
Many factors affect the local air surface temperature
changes. One factor is the geographical distribution of the
forcings such as aerosols concentration and land use. A
second factor is the geographical distribution of the climate
response to these forcings and in particular the relative
strength of local and global feedbacks. In order to distin-
guish the geographical distribution pattern from the global
mean value, the local temperature ampliﬁcation factor is
deﬁned as the ratio between the local temperature change
and the global mean temperature change. The zonal mean
average of this temperature ampliﬁcation has been shown
to be only weakly dependent on the scenario for the CMIP3
simulations (Meehl et al. 2007b). The pattern of this local
temperature ampliﬁcation factor has been used as ‘‘pattern
scaling’’ technique to estimate temperature changes under
different scenarios (Mitchell et al. 1999; Moss et al. 2010).
Figure 14 shows the pattern of the local temperature
ampliﬁcation factor for the two extreme RCP scenarios
(RCP 2.6 on the left, RCP 8.5 on the right) simulated by the
IPSL-CM5A-LR, the CM5A-MR and the CM5B-LR
models at the end of the twenty-ﬁrst century (three upper
rows). This geographical pattern is very similar in RCP 2.6
and RCP 8.5 scenarios (as well as in RCP 4.5 and RCP 6.0,
not shown) even though the forcings are quite different, in
particular the land use and BC forcings, which have strong
local signatures. However the normalized warming is
generally larger over the continent and smaller in the
Arctic region for the RCP 8.5 scenario. The general pattern
(a)
(b)
Fig. 12 a Time evolution of the global mean surface air temperature
anomaly (in K) computed by the IPSL-CM5A-LR (thick line), the
IPSL-CM5A-MR (thin line with crosses) and the IPSL-CM5B-LR
(thick dash line) models, with historical conditions for the period
1950–2005 (black) and with RCPs conditions for the period
2006–2100: RCP 2.6 (blue), RCP 4.5 (green), RCP 6.0 (light blue),
and RCP 8.5 (red). The temperature anomaly is computed with
respect to the 1985–2015 period. b Time evolution of the total (thick
line) and the ﬁrst indirect (thin line) aerosol radiative effects for the
same runs as on panel (a). For clarity, results are only shown for the
RCP 4.5 (green) and the RCP 8.5 (red) scenarios and for the IPSL-
CM5A-LR (line) and the IPSL-CM5B-LR (dash line) models. The
unit is W.m-2. For a and b, only one ensemble member is considered
and the results are smoothed using a 7-year Hanning ﬁlter
2144
J.-L. Dufresne et al.
123
of temperature change is consistent with the one previously
obtained (Meehl et al. 2007b). More speciﬁcally, there is a
larger temperature increase over the continents than over
the oceans, a strong ampliﬁcation in the Arctic regions, and
the smallest warming is found over the Southern Ocean.
The IPSL-CM5B-LR model shows a very large and prob-
ably unrealistic temperature increase poleward of 60N,
which may be related to the very cold bias in these regions
(Fig. 7), to the equatorward shift of the atmospheric zonal
wind stress and to the very weak Atlantic meridional
overturning circulation of this model (Sect. 5.5).
The RCP simulations have been extended until the end
of the twenty-third century for the IPSL-CM5A-LR model.
The differences among geographical patterns of tempera-
ture ampliﬁcation in the two extreme scenarios are larger at
the end of the twenty-third century than at the end of the
twenty-ﬁrst century even though they remain surprisingly
small compared to the very large differences between the
two global mean temperature changes: 1.9 K for RCP 2.6
and 12.7 K for RCP 8.5. Continental warming is larger in
the RCP 8.5 scenario. The relatively small polar warming
in RCP 8.5 reﬂects a very different polar ampliﬁcation,
which will be analyzed below (Sect. 5.6). For the RCP 2.6
scenario, there are minor differences between the end of
the twenty-ﬁrst and twenty-third centuries. The warming
over the southern ocean at the end of the twenty-thired
century remains small compared to the global warming.
For the RCP 4.5 scenario, the pattern of the local temper-
ature ampliﬁcation in 2300 is very similar to the one for
scenario RCP 2.6 (not shown).
5.2 Future warming projections using SRES scenarios
In this section the global mean surface air temperature
increase and the radiative forcings obtained for the SRES
scenarios used in CMIP3 are compared with those obtained
for the RCP scenarios used in CMIP5. With the same IPSL-
CM5A-LR model, simulations with both SRES and RCP
forcings were performed. The concentration of long-lived
greenhouse gases are fully speciﬁed in both SRES and
RCP, which is not the case for ozone. Here we assumed
that the ozone concentration of the SRES-A2, SRES-A1B
and SRES-B1 scenarios were the same as the ozone con-
centration of the RCP 8.5, RCP 6.0 and RCP 4.5 scenarios,
respectively. Little information regarding aerosols was
given for the SRES scenarios whereas the information is
available for the RCP scenarios. Therefore, six types of
aerosols were considered in RCP simulations (see Sect.
2.2.3) but only the sulfate aerosol was considered in the
SRES runs. For the SRES scenarios the sulfate aerosol
concentrations computed by Pham et al. (2005) were used.
To avoid a discontinuity of forcings at the beginning of
these scenarios, a historical simulation was performed
using the consistent distribution of sulfate aerosols (Bou-
cher and Pham 2002). Land use changes were also con-
sidered in the RCP runs but not in the SRES runs for which
the land use of year 2000 was used for the whole twenty-
ﬁrst century. These choices are consistent with the fact that
in CMIP3 most models considered ozone and sulfate aer-
osol forcings but no forcing due to other aerosols species
nor forcing due to land use changes, whereas for CMIP5
most models are expected to consider a larger variety of
aerosols as well as land use changes.
The range of future global mean warming for the RCP
scenarios is much larger (Fig. 15) than for the SRES sce-
narios. The RCP 8.5 scenario leads to a higher warming
than the SRES-A2 scenario, and the RCP 2.6 scenario leads
to a stabilization of the global mean surface temperature, a
feature that no SRES scenario simulates. Also, the global
(b)
(a)
Fig. 13 For the IPSL-CM5A-LR model, time evolution of the global
mean surface air temperature (a) and the net TOA radiative ﬂux
(b) for the control run (magenta), the historical runs (black), and for
the RCP 2.6 (blue), the RCP 4.5 (green), the RCP 6.0 (light blue), and
the RCP 8.5 (red) scenarios. In a the thin lines correspond to the
annual value of individual run members, the thick lines correspond to
the 11-year running mean of one particular member. In b the lines
correspond to the 11-year running mean of one particular member.
For all scenarios members extend to year 2300 except for the RCP 6.0
scenario for which the only member stops in 2100
IPSL-CM5 Earth System Model
2145
123
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
2146
J.-L. Dufresne et al.
123
mean surface temperature for RCP and SRES projections
differs signiﬁcantly except for RCP 4.5 and SRES-B1. For
these two scenarios the long-lived greenhouse gases forc-
ing and the temperature increase are very similar although
the simulated temperature increase is somewhat smaller
around 2040 for SRES-B1 compared to RCP 4.5 due to the
radiative effect of aerosol, which is larger for SRES-B1.
The aerosol radiative forcings are very different between
the two families of scenarios. These differences do not
originate from the diagnostics because the aerosol forcings
are calculated online with the same method in the different
simulations. One difference is that in the RCP family
aerosol concentrations reach a maximum around 2020 and
then decrease whereas in the SRES family the aerosol
concentrations increase until 2030–2050. The second dif-
ference is that only the sulfate aerosol was considered in
the SRES experiments whereas absorbing aerosols were
also considered in the RCP experiments, which strongly
reduce the total aerosol radiative forcing. However for all
scenarios the relative contribution of anthropogenic aero-
sols forcing compared to the total anthropogenic forcing is
smaller in 2100 than in 2000.
A common feature observed in the model results using
both scenario families is the delay between the time when
the radiative forcing in two scenarios differ and the time
when the temperature increase in response to these forcing
differ. The different trend in radiative forcing between
SRES-A2 and A1B scenarios on one hand, and between
RCP 6.0 and RCP 4.5 on the other hand, starts around
2060. The divergence in temperature increase occurs
20 years later but is still small at the end of the century.
5.3 Computing the CO2 ﬂux and the ‘‘compatible
emissions’’ of CO2
For the historical period and for each of the RCP scenarios,
the land (ORCHIDEE) and ocean (PISCES) carbon cycle
models
generate
spatially-explicit
carbon
ﬂuxes
in
response to the atmospheric CO2 concentrations and sim-
ulated climate. The simulated net land carbon ﬂux includes
a land-use component but the decomposition of this net
ﬂux into its land-use and natural parts has not yet been
analyzed. Piao et al. (2009) however did show that a
similar version of ORCHIDEE was able to reproduce the
estimated land use change related to carbon emissions
when forced over the historical period by the Climate
Research Unit temperatures and precipitations datasets
(Jones et al. 1999; Brohan et al. 2006; Doherty et al.
1999). Only the results of IPSL-CM5A-LR and CM5A-MR
runs are presented here because the carbon pools have not
reached an equilibrium state for IPSL-CM5B-LR (Sect.
4.1).
In the historical simulations with IPSL-CM5A-LR the
net ocean and land ﬂuxes increase in the 1990–1999 decade
to reach 2.2 (± 0.05) and 1.28 (± 0.1) Pg/year, respec-
tively (Fig. 16). These values are in the range of recent
estimations (Le Que´re´ et al. 2009) for the 1990–1999
(a)
(b)
Fig. 15 Time evolution of a the global mean air surface temperature
anomalies
(K)
and
of
b
the
long-lived
greenhouse
gases
(CO2, CH4, N2O, CFC. . . but no ozone) (positive values) and aerosol
(negative values) radiative forcing (Wm-2) (direct ? ﬁrst indirect)
simulated with IPSL-CM5A-LR for the historical and for the future
periods using the forcing of the RCP (line) and SRES (dash)
scenarios. The historical runs are in black. The four RCP scenarios
used in CMIP5 are RCP 2.6 (blue), RCP 4.5 (green), RCP 6 (light
blue), and RCP 8.5 (red). The three SRES scenarios used in CMIP3
are SRES-B1 (green), SRES-A1B (light blue), and SRES-A2 (red)
Fig. 14 Geographical distribution of the normalized temperature
change for the RCP 2.6 (left column) and the RCP 8.5 (right column)
scenarios at the end of the twenty-ﬁrst century (2070–2100 period,
three upper rows) for IPSL-CM5A-LR (a, b, ﬁrst row), IPSL-CM5A-
MR (c, d, second row) and IPSL-CM5B-LR (e, f, third row).
Normalized temperature change at the end of the twenty-third century
(2270–2300 period) are shown on the bottom row (g, h) for the IPSL-
CM5A-LR model. The temperature changes are computed relative to
the pre-industrial run (100-year average) and the normalized temper-
ature change is deﬁned as the local temperature change divided by the
global average temperature change
b
IPSL-CM5 Earth System Model
2147
123
decade: 2.2 ± 0.4 PgC/year for the ocean and 1.1 ± 0.9
PgC/year for the land.
Over the 2005–2300 period, the ocean uptake increases
up to 6 PgC/year in 2100 for the RCP 8.5 scenario. The
ocean uptake peaks at 5 PgC/year in 2080 for the RCP 6.0
scenario, and at 3.7 PgC/year in 2030 for the RCP 4.5
scenario before decreasing throughout the remainder of the
simulations. For the RCP 2.6 scenario, the ocean uptake
does not exceed 3.2 PgC/year over the 2005–2300 period
and is close to zero in 2300. The differences in net land ﬂux
between the different scenarios over the 2005–2300 period
is less pronounced. The net land ﬂux (including land-use
emissions) peaks at 5 PgC/year in the RCP 8.5, RCP 6.0
and RCP 4.5 scenarios during the twenty-ﬁrst century. For
the RCP 2.6 scenario, the net land ﬂux does not exceed
3 PgC/year. After 2150 the net land ﬂux is close to zero or
negative for all RCP scenarios (i.e. the land becomes a
source of carbon for the atmosphere).
We diagnosed the anthropogenic emissions compatible
with the simulated land (Fl) and ocean (Fo) carbon ﬂuxes
and prescribed CO2 concentrations using the following
equation for the emission rates
Fe ¼ dMC
dt þ ðFo þ FlÞ
ð3Þ
where MC is the mass of carbon in the atmosphere. The
ORCHIDEE model explicitly simulates the natural and
land-use components of land-atmosphere carbon ﬂuxes so
’’compatible emissions’’ refer here to fossil fuel ? cement
production only emissions. The computed compatible
emissions for the historical and RCPs simulations are
shown in Fig. 17.
For the 1990–1999 decade, the compatible emissions
amount to 6.6 (± 0.2) PgC/year, which compares well with
data-based estimates of 6.4 (± 0.4) PgC/year (Forster et al.
2007). In 2100 the cumulative compatible emissions differ
markedly between the scenarios and amount to 2,288 (± 3,
4 simulations), 1,644 (1 simulation), 1,349 (± 10, 4 sim-
ulations), 793 (± 1, 4 simulations) PgC, for the RCP 8.5,
the RCP 6.0, the RCP 4.5 and the RCP 2.6 scenarios,
respectively. The uncertainties given here are the standard
deviation of the estimates when multi-member simulations
are available.
When using the mid-resolution model (IPSL-CM5A-
MR) forced by the same RCP scenarios, the cumulative
compatible emissions amount to 2,244, 1,303 and 772 PgC
in 2100 for RCP 8.5, RCP 4.5 and RCP 2.6, respectively
(Fig. 17c). These values are similar to the ones obtained
with IPSL-CM5A-LR but they are lower by 2–3 % for
each of the scenarios. These differences are explained by a
weaker uptake of carbon by both the ocean and the land
biosphere. The reasons for this difference may be related to
the reduction of the southern westerlies biases in IPSL-
CM5A-MR compared to IPSL-CM5A-LR (see Hourdin
et al. 2013a) and its impact on oceanic carbon uptake as
demonstrated in Swart and Fyfe (2012). For the land, the
reduction of the global cool bias discussed above induces a
reduction of the positive effect of global warming on the
functioning of high- and mid-latitude vegetation, which
Fig. 16 Time evolution of the prescribed CO2 concentration (top),
computed ocean carbon uptake (middle) and land carbon uptake
(bottom) for the historical period (black) and for the RCP 2.6 (blue),
the RCP 4.5 (green), the RCP 6.0 (light blue), and the RCP 8.5 (red)
scenarios. The model used is IPSL-CM5A-LR, the concentration is in
ppmv and the carbon ﬂux is in PgC/year. Note that the simulated net
land carbon ﬂux includes a land-use component (see text)
2148
J.-L. Dufresne et al.
123
leads to a slight reduction in the ability of the vegetation to
absorb CO2.
The cumulative emissions also differ from the initial
IAMs (Integrated Assessment Models) emissions. For the
RCP 8.5 scenario, the IAM emissions amount to 2,521 PgC
in 2100. This is 230 PgC (280 PgC for IPSL-CM5A-MR)
less than with the initial IAMs. These differences are
caused by weaker sinks than the ones used in IAMs, which
could be due to a weaker response to atmospheric CO2 or
to a stronger climate-carbon feedback in our simulations.
More analysis is needed to conﬁrm this hypothesis. For the
RCP 2.6 scenario however, the IAM emissions and our
estimates agree (790 vs 772 PgC, respectively).
In 2300, cumulative compatible emissions for IPSL-
CM5A-LR are 4,946, 1,797 and 627 PgC for the RCP 8.5,
the RCP 4.5 and the RCP 2.6 scenarios, respectively.
Interestingly, the RCP 2.6 compatible emissions reach
negative values from 2100 onwards.
5.4 Future precipitation changes
In contrast to surface-air temperature changes, which are
positive over most of the globe, precipitation changes
exhibit a complex regional pattern. To facilitate the com-
parison of precipitation projections associated with differ-
ent scenarios, we use the ‘‘normalized relative precipitation
change’’, i.e. the relative change in precipitation (dP/P
computed at each grid point) normalized by the global-
mean surface-air temperature change. Units are thus %
K-1. The geographical distribution of the normalized rel-
ative precipitation changes for the different model versions
and for the different scenarios features well-known patterns
such as precipitation decrease in most of the subtropics and
an increase in the equatorial regions and in the mid and
high latitudes (Fig. 18).
Despite the differences among the forcings in each
scenario, the pattern of the change in precipitation in 2100
for a given model version is strikingly similar for the dif-
ferent RCPs scenarios (Fig. 18a-f). The regions where
precipitation decreases are almost the same for all sce-
narios, both over ocean and land, and the amplitudes of the
normalized precipitation changes are very similar. Over
north Asia and north America, the regions where precipi-
tation increases are very similar but the normalized
amplitude is a somewhat larger for the scenario with the
lowest radiative forcing (RCP 2.6) than for the scenario
with the highest radiative forcing (RCP 8.5). This is con-
sistent with the results published by Johns et al. (2011).
The relative precipitation change has very similar pat-
terns for the IPSL-CM5A-LR and the CM5A-MR models,
which only differ in the horizontal resolution of the
atmospheric
model
(Fig. 18a–d).
Increased
resolution
provides more details in the geographical distribution, for
instance in the Himalayan region, but does not lead to
signiﬁcant large scale pattern differences.
In contrast, the relative precipitation change displays
dramatic differences for the IPSL-CM5A-LR and the
CM5B-LR models, which only differ in the physical
package of the atmospheric model (Fig. 18a, b, e, f). In the
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 17 Time evolution of the compatible CO2 emissions (a, in PgC/
year) and of the cumulative emissions (b, in PgC) for the historical
period (black) and for the RCP 2.6 (blue), the RCP 4.5 (green), the
RCP 6.0 (light blue), and the RCP 8.5 (red) scenarios, simulated by
the IPSL-CM5A-LR model. The time period is restricted to
1850–2100 in (c) where the results are shown for both the IPSL-
CM5A-LR and IPSL-CM5A-MR models. The compatible emissions
refer here to fossil-fuel ? cement production only and do not include
land-use emissions
IPSL-CM5 Earth System Model
2149
123
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
2150
J.-L. Dufresne et al.
123
Paciﬁc ocean the precipitation changes along the equator
are located in the center and in the east of the basin in
CM5B, whereas it is located more westward in CM5A with
a double ITCZ signature. There is no signature of the SPCZ
in the precipitation response simulated by CM5B. Over the
tropical continents the differences in precipitation changes
are also large between CM5A and CM5B, especially over
India, East Africa, South America and Australia. The
amplitude and the sign of the precipitation changes differ.
These large differences among models in the precipitation
changes contrast with the relatively small differences in the
climatology of precipitation among models (Fig. 8).
At the end of the twenty-third century the differences
among geographical patterns of the relative precipitation
change simulated by IPSL-CM5A-LR for the two extremes
scenarios are very large (Fig. 18g, h). They are much larger
than the differences in the relative temperature changes
(Fig. 14g, h). For instance, the relative precipitation
changes along the equator in the Paciﬁc ocean are much
larger and located more westward in RCP 8.5 than in RCP
2.6. Also, the extent of the drier regions in the subtropics is
increased and the relative precipitation increase at high
latitudes is larger in RCP 8.5 than in RCP 2.6.
A useful framework to interpret the projected precipi-
tation changes consists in decomposing those changes into
precipitation changes related to atmospheric circulation
changes and precipitation changes related to water vapor
changes, referred to as dynamical and thermodynamical
components, respectively. At mid and high latitudes, the
precipitation increase is mainly explained by the thermo-
dynamical component (Emori and Brown 2005).
Over the tropical oceans and in the absence of atmo-
spheric circulation change, an increase of water vapor in
the boundary layer leads to an increase of moisture con-
vergence, and therefore to an increase of precipitation in
the convective regions and an increase of moisture diver-
gence in the subsidence regions (Chou and Neelin 2004;
Held and Soden 2006). This latter effect may be partly
compensated by an increase of evaporation but the net
effect is an increase of the precipitation contrast between
wet and dry regions (Chou et al. 2009). However the
atmospheric circulation signiﬁcantly changes in response
to the temperature increase and this circulation change is
closely coupled to precipitation changes. We use the
monthly-mean vertical velocity at 500 hPa (x500) as a
proxy
for
large-scale
atmospheric
vertical
motions.
Figure 19 shows the change in x500 (compared to pre-
industrial climate) predicted by the IPSL-CM5A-LR and
IPSL-CM5B-LR models at the end of the twenty-ﬁrst
century in the RCP 8.5 scenario.
In the middle of the Paciﬁc, along the equator, the large
precipitation
increase
simulated
by
IPSL-CM5B-LR
(Fig. 18f) is associated with a large increase in the large-
scale rising motion (or weakening of the large-scale sub-
sidence) in the same region (negative values of x500,
Fig. 19b). In contrast, the change in precipitation simulated
by IPSL-CM5A-LR is very small in this region (Fig. 18b)
and so is the change in vertical velocity (Fig. 19a). Along
the ITCZ, the strength of large-scale rising motions
decreases in both model versions (Fig. 19) but more
strongly in IPSL-CM5B-LR over the warm-pool (about
20 hPa day-1). This circulation change partly counteracts
the precipitation increase induced by the larger water vapor
amount in the atmosphere and explains why the two model
versions predict very different changes in precipitation in
this region (Fig. 18b). Further analysis and understanding
of the reasons why the precipitation changes projected by
these two models are so different will be the subject of a
forthcoming paper.
5.5 Atlantic meridional overturning circulation
The Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC)
maximum is represented in Fig. 20 for different simula-
tions from the IPSL-CM5A-LR and the IPSL-CM5A-MR
models. This index represents the strength of the meridi-
onal circulation over the North Atlantic (30S-80N,
500 m-5,000 m) and the amount of ocean water sinking at
depth in the North Atlantic. This overturning circulation is
very weak in the IPSL-CM5B-LR pre-industrial run
(AMOC index about 4 Sv) probably due to a strong bias in
the zonal wind and it will not be discussed in this section.
In the control simulations the mean AMOC maximum is
10.3 Sv in the IPSL-CM5A-LR model and 13.5 Sv in the
IPSL-CM5A-MR model. Both values are too weak com-
pared to observational estimates (Kanzow et al. 2010)
because of a lack of convection in the Labrador Sea. This
bias was also featured in previous versions of the IPSL
model (Swingedouw et al. 2007a). The improvement in the
IPSL-CM5A-MR is mainly related to a smaller equator-
ward shift in the atmospheric zonal wind stress, which is
very strong in IPSL-CM5A-LR (Marti et al. 2010). As a
consequence, the North Atlantic Ocean is saltier in IPSL-
CM5A-MR and convection occurs east of the Labrador
Fig. 18 Geographical distribution of the normalized relative precip-
itation changes for the RCP 2.6 (left column) and the RCP 8.5 (right
column) scenarios at the end of the twenty-ﬁrst century (2070–2100
period, three upper rows) for IPSL-CM5A-LR (a, b, ﬁrst row), IPSL-
CM5A-MR (c, d, second row) and IPSL-CM5B-LR (e, f, third row).
Normalized relative precipitation change at the end of the twenty-
third century (2270–2300 period) are shown on the bottom row
(g, h) for the IPSL-CM5A-LR model. The local precipitation changes
are computed relative to their local preindustrial values on a yearly
mean basis and are then normalized with the global average
temperature change. Regions where the annual mean precipitation
is less than 0.01 mm/day (i.e. the Sahara region except for IPSL-
CM5B-LR which has higher precipitation there) are in white
b
IPSL-CM5 Earth System Model
2151
123
Sea. Over the historical era, the AMOC maximum remains
very close to its value in the control simulation. In all
projections the AMOC weakens from 2020 onward and by
2050 its intensity is weaker than in the control run. On
longer time scales the projections that have been extended
using IPSL-CM5A-LR (RCP 2.6, RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5)
show very different behaviours. A recovery of the AMOC
maximum by 2100 was simulated using the RCP 2.6 sce-
nario, reaching the control value around 2200 and contin-
uing to increase slowly until 2300, while RCP 8.5 exhibits
a continuous decrease of the AMOC maximum to less than
4 Sv in 2300. Such a state can be considered as an AMOC
collapse.
To further explain the AMOC response, the evolution of
deep convection in the northern North Atlantic was ana-
lyzed for IPSL-CM5A-LR. These areas of deep convection
have been identiﬁed for this model by Escudier et al.
(2013) and are shown to drive the AMOC variability. In
particular, Fig. 21-a shows that the low frequency changes
of mixed layer depth (MLD) averaged over these areas lead
to variations in the AMOC maximum in about a decade: a
slight MLD increase in the 1960’s in the historical simu-
lations leads to an AMOC increase and deep convection
weakening in the projections starting around 2010 followed
by different behaviors in the longer term depending on the
scenario (recovery in RCP 2.6 and RCP 4.5 and collapse in
RCP 8.5). The MLD is well correlated (in phase) with the
surface density in the convection sites (Escudier et al.
2013), which is indeed the trigger for deep convection.
After linearization the surface density can be decomposed
into a haline and a thermal component to better understand
if the changes in MLD are due to a change in salinity or in
temperature. Figure 21.c and d show that the thermal
component is decreasing in all the simulations as early as
the 1960s. The haline component has a more complex
behavior. It increases in the 1960s and remains higher than
in the control simulations in all the projections until 2060.
Later on, it decreases signiﬁcantly in the RCP 8.5 long
projections while it remains at the level of the control
simulation in RCP 4.5 and even above it in RCP 2.6.
The increase in local SST is part of the increase of the
global surface temperature in response to the GHG
increase. The increase in sea surface salinity from the
1960s is the result of the balance between two opposite
effects which are the transport of saltier waters from the
tropics where the evaporation increases and precipitation
decreases compared to pre-industrial values (not shown),
and the increase in precipitation and runoff at high lati-
tudes. In this model the balance seems to favor a saliniﬁ-
cation of the North Atlantic, which stabilizes the AMOC as
was also the case in the former version of this model
(Swingedouw et al. 2007b). The total evaporation inte-
grated over the whole Atlantic (from 30S to 80N and
including the Arctic basin) increases from 0.49 Sv in the
control simulations (the Atlantic is an evaporative basin as
in the real system) up to 0.62, 0.65 and 1.23 Sv for the last
30 years of RCP 2.6, RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5, respectively.
This is associated with a large increase in fresh water
export by the atmosphere from the Atlantic to the Paciﬁc as
in IPSL-CM4 (Fig. 11 from Swingedouw et al. (2007b)).
Nevertheless, because of the thermal component that tends
to weaken deep convection in the northern North Atlantic,
the AMOC gradually weakens. For a sufﬁcient weakening
(as in RCP 8.5) of this large-scale northward transport of
heat and salt, an oceanic feedback becomes dominant: the
northward oceanic salinity transport associated with the
(a)
(b)
Fig. 19 In color, geographical distribution of the mean vertical
velocity change at 500 hPa x500(hPa day-1) simulated by IPSL-
CM5A-LR (a, left) and IPSL-CM5B-LR (b, right) at the end of the
twenty-ﬁrst century (2070-2100 period) for the RCP 8.5 scenario
relative to its value in the pre-industrial control run. The mean vertical
velocity at 500 hPa for the control run is contoured (contour values:
-40, -20 and 20 hPa day-1 with dash lines for negative values).
Negative values of x500 correspond to large-scale rising motion,
positive value to subsidence
2152
J.-L. Dufresne et al.
123
AMOC decreases, leading to a decrease in sea surface
salinity in the convection sites and a collapse of the
AMOC. This mechanism is the so-called Stommel positive
feedback (Stommel 1961). It explains the negative contri-
bution of the haline component of the density in RCP 8.5
around 2060 (Fig. 21c).
The Greenland ice sheet melting is not taken into
account in the IPSL-CM5A models although it can have a
large impact on the AMOC (Swingedouw et al. 2007b).
The analysis of such an effect will be achieved through the
coupling of IPSL-CM5A-LR with a Greenland ice sheet
model and will be presented in a future study.
5.6 Polar ampliﬁcation and sea-ice extent
Due to the large extent of snow and ice covered surfaces
over polar areas and their signiﬁcant decrease with global
warming, speciﬁc feedback mechanisms take place at high
latitudes (Manabe and Stouffer 1980). Snow and ice are
strongly sensitive to air temperature but they also strongly
affect the surface energy budget by increasing the surface
albedo and thermally isolating the oceanic surface from the
air. As a result, the temperature increase due to global
warming in the Arctic as simulated by most models is
ampliﬁed (Meehl et al. 2007b). It is also the case for the
IPSL models (Fig. 14). We focus here on the IPSL-CM5A-
LR model results.
To quantify the polar ampliﬁcation effect, we deﬁned
the ratio between the mean increase of surface air tem-
perature poleward of the Arctic and Antarctic circles
respectively,
and
the
globally
averaged
temperature
increase. To better understand the relationship between
polar ampliﬁcation and sea ice extent, the total sea ice area
in September for each scenario is computed, September
being the month during which this area is minimum and
thus the month during which the Arctic Ocean is predicted
to ﬁrst become seasonally free of ice (Fig. 22). In the
Southern Ocean, summer sea ice area is limited by
the Antarctic continent located over the pole. Therefore,
the absolute value of the Antarctic sea-ice area is more
sensitive to climate change in winter than in summer.
Figure 23 shows the polar ampliﬁcation for the Arctic
(top) and Antarctic (bottom) until 2300. The amplitude of
the internal variability is large for all scenarios, in particular
during the initial 25 years (dashed lines). By the end of the
twenty-ﬁrst century (for which simulations for all scenarios
are available) the warming in the Arctic as projected by
IPSL-CM5A-LR reaches about twice the global value
independent of the scenario. In the RCP 8.5 scenario the
Arctic ocean becomes free of ice at the end of summer by
2070 (Fig. 22). About 30 years later and after weak oscil-
lations, the Arctic ampliﬁcation slowly and continuously
decreases. In the RCP 4.5 scenario, the Arctic is never
projected to become free of sea ice but the minimum sea ice
area decreases to about a ﬁfth of its present-day value. The
Arctic ampliﬁcation in RCP 2.6 displays the highest vari-
ability in agreement with pronounced minimum sea ice area
variability and no signiﬁcant trend. The strong variability in
RCP 2.6 might arise from a seasonal effect. Summer Arctic
ampliﬁcation strongly depends on sea ice cover and snow
Fig. 20 Time evolution of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning
Circulation (AMOC) maximum taken between 500 m and the ocean
ﬂoor and from 30S to 80N for the preindustrial control run
(magenta), the historical period (black) and the RCP 2.6 (blue), RCP
4.5 (green), RCP 6.0 (light blue) and RCP 8.5 (red) scenarios.
Simulations using IPSL-CM5A-LR are in continuous line and the
ones using IPSL-CM5A-MR are in dashed line. For IPSL-CM5A-LR
simulations for which multi-member ensembles are available, the
lines show the ensemble means and the shading in gray, light red and
light green display the two standard deviation error bar for the
historical, RCP 8.5 and RCP 4.5 experiments respectively
IPSL-CM5 Earth System Model
2153
123
covered areas are the main source of winter Arctic ampli-
ﬁcation variability (Hall 2004). Given that snow extent is
larger and potentially more variable, the impact of land
covered with snow in the scenario with the lowest radiative
forcing (RCP 2.6) might be one reason for the high Arctic
ampliﬁcation variability in RCP 2.6. Another reason is that
the global and regional mean climate change signal in RCP
2.6 is of course weaker than in the other scenarios. Therefore
the computed polar ampliﬁcation is necessarily more
strongly affected by internal variability on all relevant
spatial and temporal scales for this scenario.
In the southern hemisphere, the computed polar ampli-
ﬁcation is very close to one. Austral ampliﬁcation mostly
takes place over sea ice and decreases poleward (Hall
2004). It is therefore not included in the area where the
polar ampliﬁcation was computed (Fig. 14). Variability is
highest in the scenario with the lowest radiative forcing
(RCP 2.6) and strongly correlated with sea ice area. Unlike
in the northern hemisphere, seasonal snow cover in the
southern hemisphere is small. Therefore sea ice is the most
obvious polar surface ampliﬁer of mean climate change
and internal variability via the snow-albedo feedback
mainly in summer and its effect on ocean-atmosphere heat
ﬂuxes mainly in winter. The two sets of curves (Figs. 22
bottom, 23 bottom) are indeed highly correlated. The
warming over the Antarctic continent only reaches the
global value in the RCP 8.5 scenario around 2300. Large
effective heat capacity of the Southern Ocean delays the
Antarctic warming.
6 Temperature and precipitation changes using
idealized scenarios
6.1 Climate sensitivity and feedbacks
Two types of experiments are particularly useful in CMIP5
to estimate the temperature response to an increase in CO2
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 21 Same as Fig. 20 but for
a the mixed layer depth (MLD)
in meters for winter season
(DJFM) averaged over the
convection sites as deﬁned in
Escudier et al. (2013), b surface
density averaged over the same
region (in kg/m3),
c decomposition in haline
components (related to salinity)
of the linearized surface density
(in kg/m3), d thermal
components (related to
temperature) of the same
linearization. The convection
sites are located in the Nordic
Seas, south of Greenland just
outside the Labrador Sea, and in
an extended area south of
Iceland including the Irminger
Sea (Escudier et al. 2013)
2154
J.-L. Dufresne et al.
123
concentration: the 1 % per year experiment in which,
starting from the control run, the CO2 concentration
increases by 1 % per year until a quadrupling of its initial
value (i.e. after 140 years), and the abrupt 4CO2 experi-
ment in which the CO2 concentration is instantaneously
increased to 4 times its initial value and is then held
constant. This latter experiment was not run for the IPSL-
CM4 model because it does not belong to the CMIP3
experimental design.
The feedback analysis framework detailed by Dufresne
and Bony (2008) was used to analyse the temperature
response to the CO2 forcing. In response to a radiative
forcing at the TOA DQt, the changes in surface temperature
DTs and radiative ﬂux at the TOA DFt are related by the
following equation:
DTs ¼ DFt  DQt
k
:
ð4Þ
where k is the ‘‘climate feedback parameter’’ (ﬂuxes are
positive downward). Within this framework, when the model
reaches a new equilibrium after a constant forcing has been
applied, the net ﬂux at the TOA DFt approaches zero,
yielding an equilibrium temperature change DTe
s ¼ DQt=k.
The deﬁnition of the forcing DQt is not unequivocal. A
classical method to compute this forcing is to assume an
adjustment of the stratospheric temperature (e.g. Forster
et al. 2007). Using a radiative ofﬂine calculation with
stratospheric
adjustment,
we
obtained
DQtð2CO2Þ 
3:5W:m2 (3.7 Wm-2 in clear sky conditions) for a dou-
bling of the CO2 concentration, and twice these values
(DQtð4CO2Þ  7:0Wm2, (7.4 Wm-2 clear sky)) for a
quadrupling of the CO2 concentration. The same values
were obtained for the IPSL-CM4, IPSL-CM5A and IPSL-
CM5B models, which have the same radiative code. For
intermediate values x of the ratio between the CO2 con-
centration and its pre-industrial value, the radiative forcing
is
estimated
using
the
usual
relationship:
DQtðxÞ ¼
DQtð2CO2Þ: logðxÞ= logð2Þ. Using this forcing and the
results of the 1 %-per-year experiment, the time series of
the climate feedback parameter k were computed for the
different versions of the IPSL-CM model. The values
reported in Table 1 are the 30-year average values of k
around the time of CO2 doubling (i.e. between years 56 and
85). The feedback parameter k in IPSL-CM5A-LR is very
similar to that in the previous version, IPSL-CM4, and it is
also very similar to that in IPSL-CM5A-MR. On the other
hand, the value of the feedback parameter in IPSL-CM5B-
LR differs by about 70 % from that in the other model
versions. The same results hold for the equilibrium tem-
perature change DTe
s ð2CO2Þ for a doubling of the CO2
concentration (often called ‘‘climate sensitivity’’).
Another classical metric to characterize the response to
an increase in CO2 concentration is the ‘‘transient climate
response’’ (TCR), i.e. the surface air temperature increase
in a 1 %-per-year experiment when the CO2 concentration
has doubled, i.e. 70 years after it started to increase (here
we computed the 30-year average, i.e. the average between
years 56 and 85). This transient temperature change is
found to be very similar for IPSL-CM5A-LR and IPSL-
Fig. 22 Time evolution of the sea ice area (km2) in September, for
the four RCP scenarios and for the north (top) and the south (bottom)
hemispheres. A 10-year running average is applied
(a)
(b)
Fig. 23 Time evolution of polar ampliﬁcation for both hemisphere,
poleward of the Arctic (top) and Antarctic (bottom) circles, for the
four RCP scenarios. The polar ampliﬁcation is computed every month
and plotted with a 10-year running average. The simulation ends in
2100 for the RCP 6.0 scenario. The temperature increase is computed
relative to the preindustrial run
IPSL-CM5 Earth System Model
2155
123
CM5A-MR (Table 1). This result is consistent with those
obtained by Hourdin et al. (2013a) with a broader range
of
horizontal
resolutions
of
the
atmospheric
model.
This transient temperature change is also similar for IPSL-
CM4 and IPSL-CM5A-LR. Again, IPSL-CM5B-LR is
different from the other models, with a much lower value
(&-25 %) of the TCR.
As stated earlier, the deﬁnition of the forcing DQt is not
unequivocal and recent work shows that the decomposition
of the forcing into a fast and a slow part allows for a better
analysis and understanding of the temperature and precip-
itation responses to a CO2 forcing (Andrews and Forster
2008; Gregory and Webb 2008). The forcing including the
fast response can be obtained using the abrupt 4xCO2
experiment (Gregory et al. 2004). In response to a constant
forcing, Eq. 4 implies that the slope of the regression of the
net ﬂux at the TOA as a function of the global mean sur-
face temperature provides an estimate of climate feedback.
The intercept of the regression line and the Y axis
(DTs ¼ 0) is an estimate of the radiative forcing including
the fast response of the atmosphere (Fig. 24). The intercept
of the regression line and the X axis (DFt ¼ 0) is an esti-
mate of temperature change at equilibrium DTe
s . Here we
suppose that the radiative forcing and the temperature
change at equilibrium for a doubling of CO2 are half of the
values for a quadrupling of CO2.
For the IPSL-CM5A-LR and CM5A-MR models, the
radiative forcing obtained with this method is only slightly
smaller than the classical one: 3.1 and 3.3 instead of 3.5
Wm-2 (Table 1). However this small difference masks the
large variation in shortwave and longwave forcings, which
compensate each other. For IPSL-CM5B-LR, the differ-
ence is larger: 2.7 instead of 3.5 Wm-2 (i.e. & - 20 %).
With the regression method, the feedback parameter is
signiﬁcantly smaller (in absolute value) and the tempera-
ture change at equilibrium is signiﬁcantly larger than the
one obtained with the 1 %-per-year experiment. This dif-
ference between the two methods holds for all the model
versions. The difference in temperature change at equilib-
rium should be zero if the two methods and the feedback
framework were perfect, which is not the case. It is
therefore important to compare values that have been
estimated using the same method.
In addition to the net ﬂux for all sky conditions, the net
ﬂux for clear sky conditions and the net ﬂux change due to
the presence of clouds can also be used when performing
the linear regression with the global mean surface air
temperature (Fig. 24b, c). Under clear sky conditions, the
radiative forcing estimates using the regression method are
similar for all the model versions. The values of the
feedback parameter are also similar although the absolute
value for IPSL-CM5B-LR is lower. When focusing on the
effect of clouds, the differences between IPSL-CM5A-LR
and CM5A-MR are small whereas the differences between
IPSL-CM5A-LR and CM5B-LR are large (Fig. 24c). The
differences between IPSL-CM5A-LR and CM5B-LR are
mainly due to change of the cloud radiative effect in the
short wave domain (not shown).
An important result for IPSL-CM5 is the very strong
difference between the climate sensitivities obtained with
IPSL-CM5A-LR and IPSL-CM5B-LR. While the climate
sensitivity of IPSL-CM5A-LR (DTe
s ð2CO2Þ  4:1K) lies in
the upper part of the sensitivity range of the CMIP3
models, the sensitivity of IPSL-CM5B-LR (DTe
s ð2CO2Þ 
2:6K) falls in the lower part (Meehl et al. 2007b). The
analysis of the reasons for these differences requires further
work.
6.2 Patterns of changes in surface air temperature
and in precipitation
As illustrated in previous sections, the normalized patterns
of temperature and precipitation changes are weakly
dependent on the scenario (Figs. 14 and 18). However, the
IPSL-CM4 model used for CMIP3 was not included in
these ﬁgures as no simulation with this model was per-
formed with the forcings of the RCP scenarios. In this
section, we use the results of the 1 %-per-year experiment
to compare IPSL-CM4 with IPSL-CM5. The temperature
and precipitation changes are computed over a 30-year
Table 1 Radiative forcing for a doubling of CO2DQtð2CO2Þ, feedback parameter k, transient TCR(CO2) and equilibrium DTe
s ð2CO2Þ surface
air temperature increase in response to a CO2 doubling for the different IPSL-CM model versions
Model
1%/Year CO2 increase
Abrupt 4xCO2
DQtð2CO2ÞðWm2Þ
k (Wm-2K-1)
TCR(2CO2) (K)
DTe
s ð2CO2Þ (K)
DQtð2CO2ÞðWm2Þ
k (Wm-2K-1)
DTe
s ð2CO2Þ (K)
IPSL-CM4
3.5
-0.92
2.13
3.79
IPSL-CM5A-LR
3.5
-0.98
2.09
3.59
3.12
-0.76
4.10
IPSL-CM5A-MR
3.5
-1.01
2.05
3.47
3.29
-0.80
4.12
IPSL-CM5B-LR
3.5
-1.68
1.52
2.09
2.66
-1.03
2.59
These values (except the transient temperature response) are estimated using either the 1 %/year CO2 increase experiment or the abrupt 4CO2 experiment
2156
J.-L. Dufresne et al.
123
average period centered around the time of CO2 doubling,
i.e. between years 56 and 85 after the beginning of the
experiment.
The changes simulated by the IPSL-CM4 model and the
IPSL-CM5A-LR model are quite different, especially over
the continents (Fig. 25). The normalized temperature
increase over north America is larger in IPSL-CM4 than in
IPSL-CM5A-LR and precipitation changes are signiﬁ-
cantly different over south America, India and over the
center of the Paciﬁc ocean. Although dedicated simulations
to attribute the origins of these differences have not been
performed, they are consistent with some known modiﬁ-
cations. For example, the LAI was prescribed in CM4
whereas it is computed by the phenology part of the veg-
etation model (Sect. 2.3) in CM5. Numerical instabilities of
the surface temperature, which were present in IPSL-CM4,
have been now suppressed. The soil depth has been
increased allowing greater seasonal soil water retention,
especially in the tropics. Similar differences of temperature
and precipitation changes over the continents between the
IPSL-CM4 model and the IPSL-CM5A-LR model are also
highlighted in paleoclimate experiments (Kageyama et al.
2013a). Finally, the change of the horizontal and vertical
resolutions of the atmospheric model and the tuning pro-
cess that followed have reduced the biases in the location
of the mid-latitude jets and have slightly modiﬁed the
precipitation over the Paciﬁc ocean (Hourdin et al. 2013a).
For the IPSL-CM5A-LR model, the patterns of tem-
perature and precipitation changes obtained with the 1 %
per year experiment (Fig. 25) are similar to those obtained
with the RCP scenarios (Fig. 18), conﬁrming that these
patterns are not very sensitive to the scenarios. The same
similarity of patterns between 1 % per year experiment and
RCP scenarios holds for IPSL-CM5A-MR and IPSL-
CM5B-LR (not shown).
7 Summary and conclusion
The IPSL-CM5 ESM presented in this paper represents a
major evolution in the development of coupled dynamical-
physical-biogeochemical global general circulation mod-
els. This model aims at studying the Earth’s system and
anticipating its evolution under natural and anthropogenic
inﬂuences. The interactive carbon cycle, the tropospheric
and
stratospheric
chemistry,
and
a
comprehensive
description of aerosols represented in the model allow
science questions that could not be addressed with the
IPSL-CM4 coupled ocean-atmosphere climate model used
in CMIP3. These questions include the study of carbon-
climate feedbacks and the estimate of CO2 emissions
compatible with speciﬁc atmospheric concentrations of
CO2 and land-use, the assessment of chemistry-climate
interactions, the estimate of the role played by different
forcings such as stratospheric ozone, tropospheric ozone,
and aerosols other than sulfate. An important feature of this
model is that it may be used in a large variety of conﬁg-
urations associated with a range of boundary conditions
and it includes the possibility of switching on and off
speciﬁc feedbacks (e.g. carbon-climate feedbacks, chem-
istry-climate feedbacks, ocean-atmosphere interactions).
During the development phase of the model, this possibility
has always been considered as a key feature to facilitate the
interpretation of the model results. In some conﬁgurations
the model may also be used with two different versions of
atmospheric parameterizations (referred to as CM5A and
0
2
4
6
8
−2
0
2
4
6
8
10
(a) all sky
CM5A−LR
CM5A−MR
CM5B−LR
0
2
4
6
8
−2
0
2
4
6
8
10
(b) clear sky
CM5A−LR
CM5A−MR
CM5B−LR
0
2
4
6
8
−2
0
2
4
6
8
10
(c) cloud effect
CM5A−LR
CM5A−MR
CM5B−LR
Fig. 24 Scatter plot of the net ﬂux change (DFt in Wm-2) at the
TOA as a function of the global mean surface air temperature change
(DTs in K) simulated in response to an abrupt quadrupling of CO2
concentration. The net ﬂux at the TOA is computed for a all sky
conditions and b clear sky conditions. The difference between these
two terms is the change in the cloud radiative effect c. Annual mean
values are shown in black for IPSL-CM5A-LR, in blue for IPSL-
CM5A-MR, and in red for IPSL-CM5B-LR. The straight lines
corresponds to linear regressions of the data. Intersection with the
horizontal axis (DFt = 0 Wm-2) gives the expected temperature
change at equilibrium, intersection with the vertical axis (DTs ¼ 0)
gives an estimate of the radiative forcing. The ﬂux and temperature
changes are computed relative to the values of the pre-industrial
control experiment
IPSL-CM5 Earth System Model
2157
123
CM5B) and at different horizontal resolutions (referred to
as CM5A-LR and CM5A-MR).
The IPSL-CM5A-LR version of the model has been
used to perform most of the numerical experiments deﬁned
in CMIP5 (Taylor et al. 2012) such as simulations of the
present climate, paleoclimate (Kageyama et al. 2013a, b),
climate projections associated with different RCPs sce-
narios, and multiple idealized experiments aiming at a
better interpretation of ESM results and inter-model dif-
ferences. In particular, the ozone and aerosols radiative
forcings used to simulate the evolution of climate both for
the historical and future periods have been derived from
components of the IPSL-CM5 platform rather than from
external models. As part of CMIP5 this model has also
been used to perform decadal hindcasts and forecasts ini-
tialized by a realistic ocean state and to explore the
predictability of the climate system at decadal timescales
(Swingedouw et al. 2013).
The evaluation of IPSL-CM5A-LR simulations shows
that the model exhibits many biases considered as long-
standing systematic biases of many coupled ocean-atmo-
sphere models such as a warm bias of the ocean surface
over equatorial upwelling regions, the presence of a double
ITCZ in the equatorial eastern Paciﬁc, the overestimation
of precipitation in regimes of atmospheric subsidence, the
underestimation of tropical intra-seasonal variability, and
an underestimation of the AMOC. In addition, the model
exhibits a substantial and pervasive cold bias especially at
mid-latitudes. The pre-industrial control simulation does
not exhibit any climate drift and the model predicts real-
istic amplitude and spectral characteristics of the ENSO
variability. Over the historical period, the net ocean and
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 25 Geographical distribution of the normalized surface air
temperature change (K, upper row) and the normalized relative
precipitation changes (%.K-1, lower row) simulated by the IPSL-
CM4 (left column) and IPSL-CM5A-LR (right column) models in
response to a doubling of the concentration of CO2. The temperature
and precipitation changes are computed relative to the pre-industrial
control run. The local temperature change is normalized with the
global average temperature change. The local precipitation changes
are computed relative to their local pre-industrial values on a yearly
mean basis and are then normalized with the global average
temperature change. The regions where the annual mean precipitation
in the pre-industrial run is less than 0.01 mm/day (i.e. the Sahara
region) are left blank
2158
J.-L. Dufresne et al.
123
land CO2 ﬂuxes are fully consistent with recent estima-
tions. Compared to its IPSL-CM4 parent (the IPSL OA-
GCM used in CMIP3), many aspects of the simulations
have been improved partly due to the increase of horizontal
and vertical model resolutions, to the improvement of the
land surface model and its coupling with the atmosphere,
and to several improvements of the ocean model. A further
increase in horizontal resolution of the atmospheric model
does not result in signiﬁcant further improvements except
for the location of the extratropical jets. Coupled ocean-
atmosphere simulations performed with an improved
atmospheric GCM (IPSL-CM5B) exhibit improvements in
terms of tropical climatology (e.g. reduced double ITCZ,
improved cloudiness) and tropical variability (e.g. MJO,
ENSO) of the current climate, although the representation
of the mid-latitude atmospheric circulation and the oceanic
circulation needs to be improved.
The IPSL-CM5A-LR ESM has been used to perform
climate projections associated with different sets of socio-
economic scenarios including CMIP5 RCPs and CMIP3
SRES. Consistently with other model results, the magni-
tude of global warming projections strongly depends on the
socio-economic scenario considered. Simulations associ-
ated with different RCPs suggest that an aggressive miti-
gation policy (RCP 2.6) to limit global warming to about
two degrees is possible. However it would require a sub-
stantial and fast reduction of CO2 emissions with no
emission at the end of the twenty-ﬁrst century and even
negative emissions after that. The emissions refer here to
fossil-fuel plus cement production emissions and they do
not include land-use emissions. We also found that the
behavior of some climate system components may change
drastically by the end of the twenty-ﬁrst century in the case
of a no climate policy scenario (RCP 8.5): the Arctic ocean
would become free of sea ice by about 2070, and the
Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation would col-
lapse mainly due to an oceanic feedback: the northward
oceanic salinity transport associated with the AMOC
decreases, leading to a decrease in sea surface salinity in
the convection sites and a further decrease of the AMOC.
The magnitude of regional temperature and precipitation
changes is found to depend almost linearly on the magni-
tude of the projected global warming and thus on the
scenario considered. However the geographical patterns of
temperature and precipitation changes were strikingly
similar for the different scenarios. This suggests that a key
and critical step towards a better anticipation and assess-
ment of the regional climate response to different climate
policy scenarios will consist in physically understanding
what controls these robust regional patterns using the wide
range of CMIP5 idealized experiments for each model.
The climate sensitivity and regional climate changes
associated with a given scenario are signiﬁcantly different
when using different representations of physical processes.
The pattern of precipitation changes over continents and
the transient climate response are signiﬁcantly different
between the IPSL-CM4 and IPSL-CM5A models. The
equilibrium climate sensitivity of IPSL-CM5A and IPSL-
CM5B are drastically different: 3.9 and 2.4 K, respec-
tively. The reasons for these differences are currently under
investigation and will be reported in a future paper.
The comparison between multi-model CMIP3 and
CMIP5 climate projections needs to account for signiﬁcant
differences between the forcings of the RCP and SRES
scenarios. Nevertheless we found similarities between cli-
mate projections associated with RCP 4.5 and SRES B1
scenarios. This is consistent with the similar value of the
radiative forcing due to greenhouse gases for these two
scenarios and it is also consistent with the results obtained
with a statistical approach using a model of reduced
complexity (Rogelj et al. 2012). The comparison of SRES
B1 and RCP 4.5 projections might be a useful benchmark
to assess how the spread of model projections has evolved
between CMIP3 and CMIP5.
Acknowledgments
The development of the IPSL coupled model
and of its various components has largely beneﬁted from the work of
numerous colleagues, post-doctoral scientists, or Ph.D. students. We
gratefully acknowledgement their contribution to this community
effort, and among them Gillali Abdelaziz, Gae¨lle Drouot, Alexandre
Durand. The research leading to these results was supported by
CNRS, CEA, the INSU-LEFE French Program under the project
MissTerre, the European Commission’s 7th Framework Programme,
under the projects COMBINE (Grant n226520) and IS-ENES (grant
n 228203). This work was made possible thanks to the HPC
resources of CCRT and IDRIS made available by GENCI (Grand
Equipement National de Calcul Intensif), CEA (Commissariat a`
l’Energie Atomique et aux Energies Alternatives) and CNRS (Centre
National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque) (project 016178). The authors
wish to thank Audine Laurian for the careful copy-editing of the
manuscript. The authors are grateful to the two anonymous reviewers
of this paper for their numerous and useful comments on the original
manuscript.
Open Access
This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any use, dis-
tribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original
author(s) and the source are credited.
References
Alexander MA, Blade I, Newman M, Lanzante JR, Lau NC, Scott JD
(2002) The atmospheric bridge: the inﬂuence of ENSO telecon-
nections on air-sea interaction over the global oceans. J Climate
15(16):2205–2231
Alkama R, Kageyama M, Ramstein G, Marti O, Ribstein P,
Swingedouw D (2008) Impact of a realistic river routing in
coupled ocean-atmosphere simulations of the Last Glacial
Maximum climate. Clim Dyn 30(7–8):855–869. doi:10.1007/
s00382-007-0330-1
IPSL-CM5 Earth System Model
2159
123
Andrews T, Forster PM (2008) CO2 forcing induces semi-direct
effects with consequences for climate feedback interpretations.
Geophys Res Lett 35:L04802. doi:10.1029/2007GL032273
Arakawa A, Lamb VR (1981) A potential enstrophy and energy
conserving scheme for the shallow water equations. Mon Wea
Rev 109(1):18–36
Aumont O, Bopp L (2006) Globalizing results from ocean in situ iron
fertilization studies. Global Biogeochem Cycles 20(2):GB2017.
doi:10.1029/2005GB002591
Aumont O, Bopp L, Schulz M (2008) What does temporal variability
in aeolian dust deposition contribute to sea-surface iron and
chlorophyll distributions. Geophys Res Lett 35(7):L07607. doi:
10.1029/2007GL031131
Axell LB (2002) Wind-driven internal waves and langmuir circula-
tions in a numerical ocean model of the southern Baltic sea.
J Geophys Res Oce 107(C11):3204. doi:10.1029/2001JC000922
Balkanski Y (2011) L’inﬂuence des ae´rosols sur le climat. The`se
d’Habilitation a` Diriger des Recherches. Universite´ Versailles
Saint Quentin, France
Balkanski Y, Myhre G, Gauss M, Ra¨del G, Highwood EJ, Shine KP
(2010) Direct radiative effect of aerosols emitted by transport:
from road, shipping and aviation. Atmos Chem Phys 10(10):
4477–4489. doi:10.5194/acp-10-4477-2010
Ball JT, Woodrow IE, Berry JA (1987) A model predicting stomatal
conductance and its contribution to the control of photosynthesis
under dierent environmental conditions. In: Biggens J (eds)
Progress in photosynthesis research, vol IV. Martinus Nijho,
Dordrecht, Netherlands, pp 221–224
Barnier B, Madec G, Penduff T, Molines JM, Treguier AM, Le
Sommer J, Beckmann A, Biastoch A, Bo¨ning C, Dengg J, Derval
C, Durand E, Gulev S, Remy E, Talandier C, Theetten S,
Maltrud M, McClean J, De Cuevas B (2006) Impact of partial
steps and momentum advection schemes in a global ocean
circulation model at eddy-permitting resolution. Ocean Dyn
56:543–567. doi:10.1007/s10236-006-0082-1
Beckmann A, Do¨scher R (1997) A method for improved represen-
tation of dense water spreading over topography in geopotential-
coordinate models. J Phys Oceanogr 27(4):581–591
Bellenger H, Duvel JP, Lengaigne M, Levan P (2009) Impact of
organized intraseasonal convective perturbations on the tropical
circulation. Geophys Res Lett 36:L16703. doi:10.1029/2009GL
039584
Blanke B, Delecluse P (1993) Variability of the tropical Atlantic
Ocean simulated by a general circulation model with two different
mixed-layer physics. J Phys Oceanogr 23(7):1363–1388
Bony S, Emanuel KA (2001) A parameterization of the cloudiness
associated with cumulus convection; evaluation using TOGA
COARE data. J Atmos Sci 58:3158–3183
Boucher O, Lohmann U (1995) The sulfate-CCN-cloud albedo effect:
a sensitivity study with two general circulation models. Tellus
Ser B 47:281–300
Boucher O, Pham M (2002) History of sulfate aerosol radiative forcings.
Geophys Res Lett 29(9):1308. doi:10.1029/2001GL014048
Braconnot P, Hourdin F, Bony S, Dufresne JL, Grandpeix JY, Marti O
(2007) Impact of different convective cloud schemes on the
simulation of the tropical seasonal cycle with a coupled ocean-
atmosphere model. Clim Dyn 29(5):501–520. doi:10.1007/s00,
382-007-0244-y
Brohan P, Kennedy JJ, Harris I, Tett SFB, Jones PD (2006)
Uncertainty estimates in regional and global observed temper-
ature changes: a new data set from 1850. J Geophys Res Atm
111(D12):D12106. doi:10.1029/2005JD006548
Burchard H, Rennau H (2008) Comparative quantiﬁcation of
physically and numerically induced mixing in ocean mod-
els. Ocean Model 20(3):293–311. doi:10.1016/j.ocemod.2007.
10.003
Cadule P, Bopp L, Friedlingstein P (2009) A revised estimate of the
processes contributing to global warming due to climate-carbon
feedback. Geophys Res Lett 36:L14705. doi:10.1029/2009GL
038681
Cassou C (2008) Intraseasonal interaction between the Madden-Julian
Oscillation and the North Atlantic Oscillation. Nature 455(7212):
523–527. doi:10.1038/nature07286
Cattiaux J, Quesada B, Arakelian A, Codron F, Vautard R, Yiou P
(2013) North-Atlantic dynamics and European temperature
extremes in the IPSL model: sensitivity to atmospheric resolu-
tion. Clim Dyn. doi:10.1007/s00382-012-1436-7
Cheruy F, Campoy A, Dupont JC, Ducharne A, Hourdin F, Haeffelin
M, Chiriaco M, Idelkadi A (2013) Combined inﬂuence of
atmospherice physics and soil hydrology on the simulated
meteorology at the SIRTA atmospheric obervatory. Clim Dyn.
doi:10.1007/s00382-012-1469-y
Chou C, Neelin JD (2004) Mechanisms of global warming impacts
on regional tropical precipitation. J Climate 17(13):2688–
2701
Chou C, Neelin JD, Chen CA, Tu JY (2009) Evaluating the ’’rich-
get-richer’’ mechanism in tropical precipitation change under
global warming. J Clim 22(8):1982–2005. doi:10.1175/2008JCL
I2471.1
Cionni I, Eyring V, Lamarque JF, Randel WJ, Stevenson DS, Wu F,
Bodeker GE, Shepherd TG, Shindell DT, Waugh DW (2011)
Ozone database in support of cmip5 simulations: results and
corresponding radiative forcing. Atmos Chem Phys 11(21):
11267–11292. doi:10.5194/acp-11-11267-2011
Clement A, DiNezio P, Deser C (2011) Rethinking the Ocean’s role
in the Southern Oscillation. J Clim 24(15):4056–4072. doi:
10.1175/2011JCLI3973.1
Cleveland RB, Cleveland WS, McRae J, Terpenning I (1990) STL: A
seasonal-trend decomposition procedure based on loess. J Off
Stat 6(1):3–73
Collatz G, Ribas-Carbo M, Berry J (1992) Coupled photosynthesis-
stomatal conductance model for leaves of C4 plants. Aust J Plant
Physiol 19:519–538
Cravatte S, Madec G, Izumo T, Menkes C, Bozec A (2007) Progress
in the 3-D circulation of the eastern equatorial Paciﬁc in a
climate ocean model. Ocean Model 17(1):28–48. doi:10.1016/
j.ocemod.2006.11.003
De´andreis C (2008) Impact des ae´rosols anthropiques sur le climat
pre´sent et futur. The`se, Universite´ Pierre et Marie Curie
De´andreis C, Balkanski Y, Dufresne JL, Cozic A (2012) Radiative
forcing estimates in coupled climate-chemistry models with
emphasis on the role of the temporal variability. Atmos Chem
Phys 12(12):5583–5602. doi:10.5194/acp-12-5583-2012
Doherty RM, Hulme M, Jones CG (1999) A gridded reconstruction of
land and ocean precipitation for the extended tropics from 1974
to 1994. Int J Climatol 19(2):119–142
d’Orgeval T, Polcher J, de Rosnay P (2008) Sensitivity of the West
African hydrological cycle in ORCHIDEE to inﬁltration pro-
cesses. Hydrol Earth Syst Sci 12(6):1387–1401. doi:10.5194/
hess-12-1387-2008
Ducoudre´ N, Laval K, Perrier A (1993) SECHIBA, a new set of
parameterizations of the hydrologic exchanges at the land-
atmosphere interface within the LMD atmospheric general
circulation model. Clim Dyn 6:248–273
Dufresne JL, Bony S (2008) An assessment of the primary sources of
spread of global warming estimates from coupled atmosphere-
ocean models. J Clim 21(19):5135–5144. doi:10.1175/2008JCL
I2239.1
Dufresne JL, Quaas J, Boucher O, Denvil F, Fairhead L (2005)
Contrasts in the effects on climate of anthropogenic sulfate
aerosols between the 20th and the 21st century. Geophys Res
Lett 32:L21,703. doi:10.1029/2005GL023,619
2160
J.-L. Dufresne et al.
123
Duvel JP, Bellenger H, Bellon G, Remaud M (2013) An event-by-
event assessment of tropical intraseasonal perturbations for
general circulation models. Clim Dyn. doi:10.1007/s00382-
012-1303-6
Emanuel KA (1991) A scheme for representing cumulus convection
in large-scale models. J Atmos Sci 48:2313–2335
Emile-Geay J, Madec G (2009) Geothermal heating, diapycnal
mixing and the abyssal circulation. Ocean Sci 5(2):203–217
Emori S, Brown SJ (2005) Dynamic and thermodynamic changes in
mean and extreme precipitation under changed climate. Geophys
Res Lett 32:L17706. doi:10.1029/2005GL023272
Escudier R, Mignot J, Swingedouw D (2013) A 20-yrs coupled ocean-
sea ice-atmosphere variablility mode in the North Atlantic in an
AOGCM. Clim Dyn. doi:10.1007/s00382-012-1402-4
Eyring V, Cionni I, Bodeker GE, Charlton-Perez AJ, Kinnison DE,
Scinocca JF, Waugh DW, Akiyoshi H, Bekki S, Chipperﬁeld
MP, Dameris M, Dhomse S, Frith SM, Garny H, Gettelman A,
Kubin A, Langematz U, Mancini E, Marchand M, Nakamura T,
Oman LD, Pawson S, Pitari G, Plummer DA, Rozanov E,
Shepherd TG, Shibata K, Tian W, Braesicke P, Hardiman SC,
Lamarque JF, Morgenstern O, Pyle JA, Smale D, Yamashita Y
(2010) Multi-model assessment of stratospheric ozone return
dates and ozone recovery in CCMVal-2 models. Atmos Chem
Phys 10(19):9451–9472. doi:10.5194/acp-10-9451-2010
Eyring V, Cionni I, Lamarque JF, Akiyoshi H, Bodeker GE, Charlton-
Perez AJ, Frith SM, Gettelman A, Kinnison DE, Nakamura T,
Oman LD, Pawson S, Yamashita Y (2010) Sensitivity of 21st
century stratospheric ozone to greenhouse gas scenarios. Geo-
phys Res Lett 37:L16807. doi:10.1029/2010GL044443
Eyring V, Cionni I, Arblaster J, Sedla´cek J, Perlwitz J, Young P,
Bekki S, Bergmann D, Cameron-Smith P, Collins W, Faluvegi
G, Gottschaldt KD, Horowitz L, Kinnison D, Lamarque JF,
Marsh D, Saint-Martin D, Shindell D, Sudo K, Szopa S,
Watanabe S (2012) Long-term changes in tropospheric and
stratospheric ozone and associated climate impacts in CMIP5
simulations. J Geophys Res Atm (in review)
Farquhar G, von Caemmener S, Berry J (1980) A biochemical model
of photosynthesis CO2 ﬁxation in leaves of C3 species. Planta
49:78–90
Fichefet T, Morales Maqueda MA (1997) Sensitivity of a global sea
ice model to the treatment of ice thermodynamics and dynamics.
J Geophys Res 102(C6):12609–12646. doi:10.1029/97JC00480
Fichefet T, Morales Maqueda MA (1999) Modelling the inﬂuence of
snow accumulation and snow-ice formation on the seasonal
cycle of the Antarctic sea-ice cover. Clim Dyn 15(4):251–268.
doi:10.1007/s003820050280
Folberth GA, Hauglustaine DA, Lathiere J, Brocheton F (2006)
Interactive chemistry in the Laboratoire de Meteorologie Dyna-
mique general circulation model: model description and impact
analysis of biogenic hydrocarbons on tropospheric chemistry.
Atmos Chem Phys 6:2273–2319. doi:10.5194/acp-6-2273-2006
Forster P, Ramaswamy V, Artaxo P, Berntsen T, Betts R, Fahey DW,
Haywood J, LeanDC Jand Lowe, Myhre G, Nganga J, Prinn R,
Raga G, Schulz M, Van Dorland R (2007) Changes in
atmospheric constituents and in radiative forcing. In: Solomon
S, Qin D, Manning M, Chen Z, Marquis M, Averyt KB, Tignor
M, Miller HL (eds) Climate change 2007: the scientiﬁc basis.
Contribution of working group I to the fourth assessment report
of the intergovernmental panel on climate change, chap 2.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 129–234
Fouquart Y, Bonnel B (1980) Computations of solar heating of the
Earth’s atmosphere: a new parametrization. Contrib Atmos Phys
53:35–62
Friedlingstein P, Cox P, Betts R, Bopp L, von Bloh W, Brovkin V,
Cadule P, Doney S, Eby M, Fung I, Bala G, John J, Jones C, Joos
F, Kato T, Kawamiya M, Knorr W, Lindsay K, Matthews HD,
Raddatz T, Rayner P, Reick C, Roeckner E, Schnitzler KG,
Schnur R, Strassmann K, Weaver AJ, Yoshikawa C, Zeng N
(2006) Climate-carbon cycle feedback analysis: Results from the
C4MIP model intercomparison. J Clim 19(14):3337–3353. doi:
10.1175/JCLI3800.1
Fro¨hlich C, Lean J (2004) Solar radiative output and its variability:
evidence and mechanisms. Astron Astrophys Rev 12(4):273–
320. doi:10.1007/s00159-004-0024-1
Gastineau G, D’Andrea F, Frankignoul C (2013) Atmospheric
response to the north atlantic ocean variability on seasonal to
decadal time scales. Clim Dyn. doi:10.1007/s00382-012-1333-0
Gent PR, Mcwilliams JC (1990) Isopycnal mixing in ocean circula-
tion models. J Phys Oceanogr 20(1):150–155
Goulet L, Duvel JP (2000) A new approach to detect and characterize
intermittent atmospheric oscillations: application to the intra-
seasonal oscillation. J Atmos Sci 57(15):2397–2416. doi:
10.1175/1520-0469(2000)057\2397:ANATDA[2.0.CO;2
Grandpeix JY, Lafore JP (2010) A density current parameterization
coupled with emanuel’s convection scheme. Part I: the models.
J Atmos Sci 67(4):881–897. doi:10.1175/2009JAS3045.1
Grandpeix JY, Lafore JP, Cheruy F (2010) A density current
parameterization coupled with emanuel’s convection scheme.
Part II: 1D simulations. J Atmos Sci 67(4):898–922. doi:10.1175/
2009JAS3045.1
Gregory J, Webb M (2008) Tropospheric adjustment induces a cloud
component in CO2 forcing. J Clim 21(1):58–71. doi:10.1175/
2007JCLI1834.1
Gregory JM, Ingram WJ, Palmer MA, Jones GS, Stott PA, Thorpe
RB, Lowe JA, Johns TC, Williams KD (2004) A new method for
diagnosing radiative forcing and climate sensitivity. Geophys
Res Lett 31(3):L03205. doi:10.1029/2003GL018747
Guemas V, Codron F (2011) Differing impacts of resolution changes
in latitude and longitude on the midlatitudes in the LMDZ
atmospheric GCM. J Clim 24(22):5831–5849. doi:10.1175/
2011JCLI4093.1
Guilyardi E, Wittenberg A, Fedorov A, Collins M, Wang C,
Capotondi A, van Oldenborgh GJ, Stockdale T (2009) Under-
standing El Nino in ocean-atmosphere general circulation
models: progress and challenges. Bull Am Meteorol Soc
90(3):325–340. doi:10.1175/2008BAMS2387.1
Hall A (2004) The role of surface albedo feedback in climate.
J Climate 17(7):1550–1568
Hansen J, Sato M, Kharecha P, von Schuckmann K (2011) Earth’s
energy imbalance and implications. Atmos Chem Phys 11(24):
13421–13449.
doi:10.5194/acp-11-13421-2011.
http://www.
atmos-chem-phys.net/11/13421/2011/
Hansen J, Sato M, Ruedy R, Nazarenko L, Lacis A, Schmidt G,
Russell G, Aleinov I, Bauer M, Bauer S, Bell N, Cairns B,
Canuto V, Chandler M, Cheng Y, Del Genio A, Faluvegi G,
Fleming E, Friend A, Hall T, Jackman C, Kelley M, Kiang N,
Koch D, Lean J, Lerner J, Lo K, Menon S, Miller R, Minnis P,
Novakov T, Oinas V, Perlwitz J, Perlwitz J, Rind D, Romanou
A, Shindell D, Stone P, Sun S, Tausnev N, Thresher D, Wielicki
B, Wong T, Yao M, Zhang S (2005) Efﬁcacy of climate forcings.
J Geophys Res Atm 110(D18):D18104. doi:10.1029/2005JD
005776
Hauglustaine D, Hourdin F, Jourdain L, Filiberti M, Walters S,
Lamarque J, Holland E (2004) Interactive chemistry in the
Laboratoire de Meteorologie Dynamique general circulation
model: description and background tropospheric chemistry
evaluation. J Geophys Res Atm 109(D4):D04314. doi:10.1029/
2003JD003957
Held IM, Soden BJ (2006) Robust responses of the hydrological cycle
to global warming. J Clim 19:5686–5699
Hibler WD (1979) A dynamic thermodynamic sea ice model. J Phys
Oceanogr 9(4):815–846
IPSL-CM5 Earth System Model
2161
123
Hourdin F, Armengaud A (1999) The use of ﬁnite-volume methods
for atmospheric advection of trace species. Part I: test of vairious
formulations in a general circulation model. Mon Wea Rev
127:822–837
Hourdin F, Couvreux F, Menut L (2002) Parameterisation of the dry
convective boundary layer based on a mass ﬂux representation of
thermals. J Atmos Sci 59:1105–1123
Hourdin F, Musat I, Bony S, Braconnot P, Codron F, Dufresne JL,
Fairhead L, Filiberti MA, Friedlingstein P, Grandpeix JY,
Krinner G, LeVan P, Lott F (2006) The LMDZ4 general
circulation model: climate performance and sensitivity to
parametrized physics with emphasis on tropical convection.
Clim Dyn 27(7–8):787–813. doi:10.1007/s00,382-006-0158-0
Hourdin F, Foujols MA, Codron F, Guemas V, Dufresne JL, Bony S,
Denvil S, Guez L, Lott F, Gatthas J, Braconnot P, Marti O,
Meurdesoif Y, Bopp L (2013a) Impact of the LMDZ atmo-
spheric grid conﬁguration on the climate and sensitivity of the
IPSL-CM5A
coupled
model.
Submited
Clim
Dyn.
doi:
10.1007/s00382-012-1411-3
Hourdin F, Grandpeix JY, Rio C, Bony S, Jam A, Cheruy F, Rochetin
N, Fairhead L, Idelkadi A, Musat I, Dufresne JL, Lefebvre MP,
Lahellec A, Roehrig R (2013b) From LMDZ5A to LMDZ5B:
revisiting the parameterizations of clouds and convection in the
atmosperic component of the IPSL-CM5 climate model. Clim
Dyn. doi:10.1007/s00382-012-1343-y
Huffman G, Adler R, Morrissey M, Bolvin D, Curtis S, Joyce R,
McGavock B, Susskind J (2001) Global precipitation at one-
degree daily resolution from multisatellite observations. J Hydro-
meteor 2(1):36–50
Hurtt G, Chini L, Frolking S, Betts R, Feddema J, Fischer G, Fisk J,
Hibbard K, Houghton R, Janetos A, Jones C, Kindermann G,
Kinoshita T, Klein Goldewijk K, Riahi K, Shevliakova E, Smith
S, Stehfest E, Thomson A, Thornton P, van Vuuren D, Wang Y
(2011) Harmonization of land-use scenarios for the period
1500–2100: 600 years of global gridded annual land-use tran-
sitions, wood harvest, and resulting secondary lands. Climatic
Change 109:117–161. doi:10.1007/s10584-011-0153-2
IPCC (2007) In: Solomon S, Qin D, Manning M, Chen Z, Marquis M,
Averyt KB, Tignor M, Miller HL (eds) Climate change 2007: the
scientiﬁc basis. Contribution of working group I to the fourth
assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate
change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, p 996
Jam A, Hourdin F, Rio C, Couvreux F (2013) Resolved versus
parametrized boundary-layer plumes. Part III: a diagnostic
boundary-layer cloud parameterization derived from large eddy
simulations. Boundary-Layer Meteorol. doi:10.1007/s10546-
012-9789-3
Johns T, Royer JF, Ho¨schel I, Huebener H, Roeckner E, Manzini E,
May W, Dufresne JL, Ottera˚ O, van Vuuren D, Salasy Melia D,
Giorgetta M, Denvil S, Yang S, Fogli P, Ko¨rper J, Tjiputra J,
Stehfest E, Hewitt C (2011) Climate change under aggressive
mitigation: The ENSEMBLES multi-model experiment. Clim
Dyn 37(8–10):1975–2003. doi:10.1007/s00382-011-1005-5
Jones PD, New M, Parker DE, Martin S, Rigor IG (1999) Surface air
temperature and its changes over the past 150 years. Rev
Geophys 37(2):173–199. doi:10.1029/1999RG900002
Jourdain L, Bekki S, Lott F, Lefevre F (2008) The coupled chemistry-
climate model LMDz-REPROBUS: description and evaluation
of a transient simulation of the period 1980–1999. Ann Geophys
26(6):1391–1413. doi:10.5194/angeo-26-1391-2008
Kageyama M, Braconnot P, Bopp L, Caubel A, Foujols MA,
Guilyardi E, Khodri M, Lloyd J, Lombard F, Mariotti V, Marti
O, Roy T, Woillez MN (2013a) Mid-Holocene and Last Glacial
Maximum climate simulations with the IPSL model. Part I:
comparing IPSL CM5A to IPSL CM4. Clim Dyn. doi:
10.1007/s00382-012-1488-8
Kageyama M, Braconnot P, Bopp L, Caubel A, Foujols MA, Guilyardi
E, Khodri M, Lloyd J, Lombard F, Mariotti V, Marti O, Roy T,
Woillez MN (2013b) Mid-Holocene and Last Glacial Maximum
climate simulations with the IPSL model. Part II: model-data
comparisons. Clim Dyn. doi:10.1007/s00382-012-1499-5
Kanzow T, Cunningham SA, Johns WE, Hirschi JJM, Marotzke J,
Baringer MO, Meinen CS, Chidichimo MP, Atkinson C, Beal
LM, Bryden HL, Collins J (2010) Seasonal variability of the
atlantic meridional overturning circulation at 26.5 degrees n.
J Clim 23(21):5678–5698. doi:10.1175/2010JCLI3389.1
Kim ST, Jin FF (2011) An ENSO stability analysis. Part II: results
from the twentieth and twenty-ﬁrst century simulations of the
CMIP3 models. Clim Dyn 36(7–8):1609–1627. doi:10.1007/
s00382-010-0872-5
Koch-Larrouy A, Madec G, Bouruet-Aubertot P, Gerkema T,
Bessieres L, Molcard R (2007) On the transformation of Paciﬁc
water into Indonesian throughﬂow water by internal tidal
mixing. Geophys Res Lett 34(4):L04604. doi:10.1029/2006
GL028405
Koch-Larrouy A, Lengaigne M, Terray P, Madec G, Masson S (2010)
Tidal mixing in the Indonesian Seas and its effect on the tropical
climate system. Clim Dyn 34(6):891–904. doi:10.1007/s00382-
009-0642-4
Konsta D, Chepfer H, Dufresne JL, Idelkadi A, Cesana G (2013)
Evaluation of clouds simulated by the LMDZ5 GCM using
A-train satellite observations (CALIPSO-PARASOL-CERES).
Clim Dyn (submitted)
Krinner G, Viovy N, de Noblet-Ducoudre´ N, Oge´e J, Polcher J,
Friedlingstein P, Ciais P, Sitch S, Prentice IC (2005) A dynamic
global vegetation model for studies of the coupled atmosphere-
biosphere system. Global Biogeochem Cycles 19(1):GB1015.
doi:10.1029/2003GB002199
Lamarque JF, Bond TC, Eyring V, Granier C, Heil A, Klimont Z, Lee
D, Liousse C, Mieville A, Owen B, Schultz MG, Shindell D,
Smith SJ, Stehfest E, Van Aardenne J, Cooper OR, Kainuma M,
Mahowald N, McConnell JR, Naik V, Riahi K, van Vuuren DP
(2010) Historical (1850-2000) gridded anthropogenic and bio-
mass burning emissions of reactive gases and aerosols: method-
ology and application. Atmos Chem Phys 10(15):7017–7039.
doi:10.5194/acp-10-7017-2010
Lamarque JF, Kyle G, Meinshausen M, Riahi K, Smith S, van Vuuren
D, Conley A, Vitt F (2011) Global and regional evolution of
short-lived radiatively-active gases and aerosols in the represen-
tative concentration pathways. Climatic Change 109(1–2):
191–212. doi:10.1007/s10584-011-0155-0
Large W, Yeager S (2009) The global climatology of an interannually
varying air-sea ﬂux data set. Clim Dyn 33:341–364. doi:
10.1007/s00382-008-0441-3
Lathie`re J, Hauglustaine D, de Noblet-Ducoudre´ N, Krinner G,
Folberth GA (2005) Past and future changes in biogenic volatile
organic compound emissions simulated with a global dynamic
vegetation model. Geophys Res Lett 32:L20818. doi:10.1029/
2005GL024164
Laval K, Sadourny R, Seraﬁni Y (1981) Land surface processes in a
simpliﬁed general circulation model. Geophys Astrophys Fluid
Dyn 17:129–150
Le Que´re´ C, Raupach MR, Canadell JG, Marland G, Bopp L, Ciais P,
Conway TJ, Doney SC, Feely RA, Foster P, Friedlingstein P,
Gurney K, Houghton RA, House JI, Huntingford C, Levy PE,
Lomas MR, Majkut J, Metzl N, Ometto JP, Peters GP, Prentice
IC, Randerson JT, Running SW, Sarmiento JL, Schuster U, Sitch
S, Takahashi T, Viovy N, van der Werf GR, Woodward FI
(2009) Trends in the sources and sinks of carbon dioxide. Nat
Geosci 2(12):831–836. doi:10.1038/ngeo689
Le Sommer J, Penduff T, Theetten S, Madec G, Barnier B (2009)
How
momentum
advection
schemes
inﬂuence
current-
2162
J.-L. Dufresne et al.
123
topography interactions at eddy permitting resolution. Ocean
Model 29(1):1–14. doi:10.1016/j.ocemod.2008.11.007
Lean J (2009) Calculations of solar irradiance: monthly means from
1882 to 2008, annual means from 1610 to 2008. http://www.
geo.fu-berlin.de/en/met/ag/strat/forschung/SOLARIS/Input_data/
Calculations_of_Solar_Irradiance.pdf
Lean J, Rottman G, Harder J, Kopp G (2005) SORCE contributions to
new understanding of global change and solar variability. Solar
Phys 230:27–53. doi:10.1007/s11207-005-1527-2
Lefevre F, Brasseur GP, Folkins I, Smith AK, Simon P (1994)
Chemistry of the 1991-1992 stratospheric winter: three-dimen-
sional model simulations. J Geophys Res Atm 99(D4):8183–
8195. doi:10.1029/93JD03476
Lefevre F, Figarol F, Carslaw KS, Peter T (1998) The 1997 Arctic
ozone depletion quantiﬁed from three-dimensional model sim-
ulations. Geophys Res Lett 25(13):2425–2428. doi:10.1029/
98GL51812
Lengaigne M, Menkes C, Aumont O, Gorgues T, Bopp L, Andre JM,
Madec G (2007) Inﬂuence of the oceanic biology on the tropical
Paciﬁc climate in a coupled general circulation model. Clim Dyn
28(5):503–516. doi:10.1007/s00382-006-0200-2
Lengaigne M, Madec G, Bopp L, Menkes C, Aumont O, Cadule P
(2009) Bio-physical feedbacks in the Arctic Ocean using an
Earth system model. Geophys Res Lett 36:L21602. doi:
10.1029/2009GL040145
Lenton A, Codron F, Bopp L, Metzl N, Cadule P, Tagliabue A,
Sommer JL (2009) Stratospheric ozone depletion reduces ocean
carbon uptake and enhances ocean acidiﬁcation. Geophys Res
Lett 36:L12606. doi:10.1029/2009GL038227
Liebmann B, Smith CA (1996) Description of a complete (interpo-
lated) outgoing longwave radiation dataset. Bull Am Meteorol
Soc 77(6):1275–1277
Lloyd J, Guilyardi E, Weller H (2011) The role of atmosphere
feedbacks during ENSO in the CMIP3 models. Part II: using
AMIP runs to understand the heat ﬂux feedback mechanisms.
Clim Dyn 37(7–8):1271–1292. doi:10.1007/s00382-010-0895-y
Lloyd J, Guilyardi E, Weller H (2012) The role of atmosphere
feedbacks during ENSO in the CMIP3 models. Part III: the
shortwave
ﬂux
feedback.
J
Clim
25(12):4275–4293.
doi:
10.1175/JCLI-D-11-00178.1
Lott F (1999) Alleviation of stationary Biases in a GCM through a
mountain drag parameterization scheme and a simple represen-
tation of mountain lift forces. Mon Wea Rev 127:788–801
Lott F, Fairhead L, Hourdin F, Levan P (2005) The stratospheric
version of LMDz: dynamical climatologies, arctic oscillation,
and impact on the surface climate. Clim Dyn 25(7–8):851–868.
doi:10.1007/s00382-005-0064-x
Louis JF (1979) A parametric model of vertical eddy ﬂuxes in the
atmosphere. Boundary Layer Meteorol 17:187–202
Loveland TR, Reed BC, Brown JF, Ohlen DO, Zhu Z, Yang L,
Merchant JW (2000) Development of a global land cover
characteristics database and IGBP DISCover from 1 km AV-
HRR data. Int J Remote Sens 21(6–7):1303–1330. doi:10.1080/
014311600210191
Ludwig W, Probst J, Kempe S (1996) Predicting the oceanic input of
organic carbon by continental erosion. Global Biogeochemical
Cycles 10(1):23–41. doi:10.1029/95GB02925
Lyman JM, Good SA, Gouretski VV, Ishii M, Johnson GC, Palmer
MD, Smith DM, Willis JK (2010) Robust warming of the global
upper ocean. Nature 465(7296):334–337. doi:10.1038/nature
09043
Le´vy M, Estublier A, Madec G (2001) Choice of an advection scheme
for biogeochemical models. Geophys Res Lett 28(19):3725–
3728. doi:10.1029/2001GL012947
Madec G (2008) NEMO ocean engine. Technical note, IPSL,
available
at
http://www.nemo-ocean.eu/content/download/
11245/56055/ﬁle/NEMO_book_v3_2.pdf
Madec G, Imbard M (1996) A global ocean mesh to overcome the
North Pole singularity. Clim Dyn 12(6):381–388. doi:10.1007/
BF00211684
Madronich S, Flocke S (1998) The role of solar radiation in
atmospheric chemistry. In: Boule P (eds) Handbook of environ-
mental chemistry. Springer, Heidelberg, pp 1–26
Manabe S, Stouffer RJ (1980) Sensitivity of a global climate model to
an increase of CO2 concentration in the atmosphere. J Geophys
Res Oce 85(C10):5529–5554. doi:10.1029/JC085iC10p05529
Marti O, Braconnot P, Dufresne JL, Bellier J, Benshila R, Bony S,
Brockmann P, Cadule P, Caubel A, Codron F, de Noblet N,
Denvil S, Fairhead L, Fichefet T, Foujols MA, Friedlingstein P,
Goosse H, Grandpeix JY, Guilyardi E, Hourdin F, Krinner G,
Le´vy C, Madec G, Mignot J, Musat I, Swingedouw D, J,
Talandier C (2010) Key features of the IPSL ocean atmosphere
model and its sensitivity to atmospheric resolution. Clim Dyn
34:1–26. doi:10.1007/s00382-009-0640-6
Martin GM, Bellouin N, Collins WJ, Culverwell ID, Halloran PR,
Hardiman SC, Hinton TJ, Jones CD, McDonald RE, McLaren
AJ, O’Connor FM, Roberts MJ, Rodriguez JM, Woodward S,
Best MJ, Brooks ME, Brown AR, Butchart N, Dearden C,
Derbyshire SH, Dharssi I, Doutriaux-Boucher M, Edwards JM,
Falloon PD, Gedney N, Gray LJ, Hewitt HT, Hobson M,
Huddleston MR, Hughes J, Ineson S, Ingram WJ, James PM,
Johns TC, Johnson CE, Jones A, Jones CP, Joshi MM, Keen AB,
Liddicoat S, Lock AP, Maidens AV, Manners JC, Milton SF,
Rae JGL, Ridley JK, Sellar A, Senior CA, Totterdell IJ, Verhoef
A, Vidale PL, Wiltshire A (2011) The HadGEM2 family of met
ofﬁce uniﬁed model climate conﬁgurations. Geosci Model Dev
4(3):723–757. doi:10.5194/gmd-4-723-2011
Marzin C, Braconnot P (2009) Variations of Indian and African
monsoons induced by insolation changes at 6 and 9.5 kyr BP.
Clim Dyn 33(2-3):215–231. doi:10.1007/s00382-009-0538-3
Maury P, Lott F, Guez L, Duvel JP (2013) Tropical variability and
stratospheric equatorial waves in the IPSLCM5 model. Clim
Dyn. doi:10.1007/s00382-011-1273-0
Meehl GA, Covey C, McAvaney B, Latif M, Stouffer RJ (2005)
Overview of the coupled model intercomparison project. Bull
Am Meteorol Soc 86(1):89–93
Meehl GA, Covey C, Delworth T, Latif M, McAvaney B, Mitchell
JFB, Stouffer RJ (2007) The WCRP CMIP3 multi-model dataset:
a new era in climate change research. Bull Am Meteorol Soc
88(9):1383–1394. doi:10.1175/BAMS-88-9-1383
Meehl GA, Stocker TF, Collins WD, Friedlingstein P, Gaye AT,
Gregory JM, Kitoh A, Knutti R, Murphy JM, Noda A, Raper
SCB, Watterson IG, Weaver AJ, Zhao ZC (2007) Global climate
projections. In: Solomon S, Qin D, Manning M, Chen Z, Marquis
M, Averyt KB, Tignor M, Miller HL (eds) Climate change 2007:
the scientiﬁc basis. Contribution of working group I to the fourth
assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate
change, chap 10. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
pp 747–846
Meinshausen M, Smith SJ, Calvin KV, Daniel JS, Kainuma, JF M
Lamarque, Matsumoto K, Montzka SA, Raper SCB, Riahi K,
Thomson AM, Velders GJM, van Vuuren D (2011) The RCP
greenhouse gas concentrations and their extension from 1765 to
2300. Climatic Change 109:213–241. doi:10.1007/s10584-011-
0156-z
Mellor G, Blumberg A (2004) Wave breaking and ocean surface layer
thermal response. J Phys Oceanogr 34(3):693–698. doi:10.1175/
2517.1
IPSL-CM5 Earth System Model
2163
123
Menut L, PTripathi O, Colette A, Vautard R, Flaounas E, Bessagnet B
(2013) Evaluation of regional climate simulations for air quality
modelling purposes. Clim Dyn. doi:10.1007/s00382-012-1345-9
Merryﬁeld WJ, Holloway G, Gargett AE (1999) A global ocean
model
with
double-diffusive
mixing.
J
Phys
Oceanogr
29(6):1124–1142
Mitchell JFB, Johns TC, Eagles M, Ingram WJ, Davis RA (1999)
Towards the construction of climate change scenarios. Climatic
Change 41(3–4):547–581. doi:10.1023/A:1005466909820
Morcrette JJ, Smith L, Fouquart Y (1986) Pressure and temperature
dependence of the absorption in longwave radiation parametri-
zations. Contrib Atmos Phys 59(4):455–469
Morgenstern O, Giorgetta MA, Shibata K, Eyring V, Waugh DW,
Shepherd TG, Akiyoshi H, Austin J, Baumgaertner AJG, Bekki
S, Braesicke P, Bruehl C, Chipperﬁeld MP, Cugnet D, Dameris
M, Dhomse S, Frith SM, Garny H, Gettelman A, Hardiman SC,
Hegglin MI, Joeckel P, Kinnison DE, Lamarque JF, Mancini E,
Manzini E, Marchand M, Michou M, Nakamura T, Nielsen JE,
Olivie D, Pitari G, Plummer DA, Rozanov E, Scinocca JF, Smale
D, Teyssedre H, Toohey M, Tian W, Yamashita Y (2010)
Review of the formulation of present-generation stratospheric
chemistry-climate models and associated external forcings.
J Geophys Res Atm 115:D00M02. doi:10.1029/2009JD013728
Morissey ML (1990) An evaluation of ship data in the equatorial
western Paciﬁc. J Clim 3(1):99–112
Moss RH, Edmonds JA, Hibbard KA, Manning MR, Rose SK, van
Vuuren DP, Carter TR, Emori S, Kainuma M, Kram T, Meehl
GA, Mitchell JFB, Nakicenovic N, Riahi K, Smith SJ, Stouffer
RJ, Thomson AM, Weyant JP, Wilbanks TJ (2010) The next
generation of scenarios for climate change research and assess-
ment. Nature 463(7282):747–756. doi:10.1038/nature08823
Najjar RG, Jin X, Louanchi F, Aumont O, Caldeira K, Doney SC,
Dutay JC, Follows M, Gruber N, Joos F, Lindsay K, Maier-
Reimer E, Matear RJ, Matsumoto K, Monfray P, Mouchet A, Orr
JC, Plattner GK, Sarmiento JL, Schlitzer R, Slater RD, Weirig
MF, Yamanaka Y, Yool A (2007) Impact of circulation on
export production, dissolved organic matter, and dissolved
oxygen in the ocean: results from phase II of the Ocean
carbon-cycle model intercomparison project (OCMIP-2). Global
Biogeochem Cycles 21(3):GB3007. doi:10.1029/2006GB002857
Persechino A, Mignot J, Swingedouw D, Labetoulle S, Guilyardi E
(2013) Decadal predictability of the atlantic meridional over-
turning circulation and climate in the IPSLCM5A-LR model.
Clim Dyn. doi:10.1007/s00382-012-1466-1
Pham M, Boucher O, Hauglustaine D (2005) Changes in atmospheric
sulfur burdens and concentrations and resulting radiative forc-
ings under IPCC SRES emission scenarios for 1990–2100.
J Geophys Res Atm 110:D06112. doi:10.1029/2004JD005125
Piao S, Ciais P, Friedlingstein P, de Noblet-Ducoudre N, Cadule P,
Viovy N, Wang T (2009) Spatiotemporal patterns of terrestrial
carbon cycle during the 20th century. Global Biogeochem
Cycles 23:GB4026. doi:10.1029/2008GB003339
Quaas J, Boucher O (2005) Constraining the ﬁrst aerosol indirect
radiative forcing in the LMDZ GCM using POLDER and
MODIS satellite data. Geophys Res Lett 32:L17814. doi:
10.1029/2005GL023850
Ramaswamy V, Boucher O, Haigh J, Hauglustaine D, Haywood J,
Myhre G, Nakajima T, Shi G, Solomon S (2001) Radiative
forcing of climate change. In: Houghton JT, Ding Y, Griggs DJ,
Noguer M, Linden PJ, Dai X, Maskell K, Johnson CA (eds)
Climate change 2001: the scientiﬁc basis. Contribution of
working group I to the third assessment report of the intergov-
ernmental panel on climate change, chap 6. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge, pp 349–416
Rayner NA, Parker DE, Horton EB, Folland CK, Alexander LV,
Rowell DP, Kent EC, Kaplan A (2003) Global analyses of sea
surface temperature, sea ice, and night marine air temperature
since the late nineteenth century. J Geophys Res Atm 108(D14):
4407. doi:10.1029/2002JD002670
Rio C, Hourdin F (2008) A thermal plume model for the convective
boundary layer: representation of cumulus clouds. J Atmos Sci
65:407–425
Rio C, Hourdin F, Couvreux F, Jam A (2010) Resolved versus
parametrized boundary-layer plumes. Part II: continuous formu-
lations of mixing rates for mass-ﬂux schemes. Boundary Layer
Meteorol 135:469–483. doi:10.1007/s10546-010-9478-z
Rogelj J, Meinshausen M, Knutti R (2012) Global warming under old
and new scenarios using IPCC climate sensitivity range estimates.
Nat Clim Change 2(4):248–253. doi:10.1038/nclimate1385
de Rosnay P, Polcher J (1998) Modelling root water uptake in a
complex land surface scheme coupled to a GCM. Hydrol Earth
Syst Sci 2(2–3):239–255. doi:10.5194/hess-2-239-1998
de Rosnay P, Polcher J, Laval K, Sabre M (2003) Integrated
parameterization
of
irrigation
in
the
land
surface
model
ORCHIDEE. Validation over Indian Peninsula. Geophys Res
Lett 30(19):1986. doi:10.1029/2003GL018024
Sadourny R, Laval K (1984) January and July performance of the
LMD general circulation model. In: New perspectives in climate
modelling. Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam, pp 173–198
Sander SP, Friedl RR, Golden DM, Kurylo MJ, Moortgat GK, Keller-
Rudek H, Wine PH, Ravishankara AR, Kolb CE, Molina MJ,
Finlayson-Pitts BJ, Huie RE, Orkin VL (2006) Chemical kinetics
and photochemical data for use in atmospheric studies, evalu-
ation no. 15. JPL Publication 06-2, Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
Pasadena (CA), USA, http://jpldataeval.jpl.nasa.gov
Sato M, Hansen JE, McCormick MP, Pollack JB (1993) Stratospheric
aerosol
optical
depths,
1850–1990.
J
Geophys
Res
Atm
98(D12):22987–22994. doi:10.1029/93JD02553
Schulz M (2007) Constraining model estimates of the aerosol
radiative forcing. The`se d’Habilitation a` Diriger des Recherches,
Universite´ Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France
Schulz M, Balkanski Y, Guelle W, Dulac F (1998) Role of aerosol
size distribution and source location in a three-dimensional
simulation of a saharan dust episode tested against satellite-
derived optical thickness. J Geophys Res Atm 103(D9):10579–
10592. doi:10.1029/97JD02779
Simmons HL, Jayne SR, Laurent LCS, Weaver AJ (2004) Tidally
driven mixing in a numerical model of the ocean general
circulation.
Ocean
Modelling 6(3-4):245–263.
doi:10.1016/
S1463-5003(03)00011-8
Son SW, Gerber EP, Perlwitz J, Polvani LM, Gillett NP, Seo KH,
Eyring V, Shepherd TG, Waugh D, Akiyoshi H, Austin J,
Baumgaertner A, Bekki S, Braesicke P, Bruehl C, Butchart N,
Chipperﬁeld MP, Cugnet D, Dameris M, Dhomse S, Frith S,
Garny H, Garcia R, Hardiman SC, Joeckel P, Lamarque JF,
Mancini E, Marchand M, Michou M, Nakamura T, Morgenstern
O, Pitari G, Plummer DA, Pyle J, Rozanov E, Scinocca JF,
Shibata K, Smale D, Teyssedre H, Tian W, Yamashita Y (2010)
Impact of stratospheric ozone on Southern Hemisphere circula-
tion change: a multimodel assessment. J Geophys Res Atm
115:D00M07. doi:10.1029/2010JD014271
Stevens B, Schwartz SE (2012) Observing and modeling Earth’s
energy ﬂows. Surv Geophys 33(3–4):779–816. doi:10.1007/
s10712-012-9184-0
Stommel H (1961) Thermohaline convection with two stable regimes
of ﬂow. Tellus 13(2):224–230. doi:10.1111/j.2153-3490.1961.
tb00079.x
Swart NC, Fyfe JC (2012) Ocean carbon uptake and storage
inﬂuenced by wind bias in global climate models. Nat Clim
Change 2(1):47–52. doi:10.1038/NCLIMATE1289
Swingedouw D, Braconnot P, Delecluse P, Guilyardi E, Marti O
(2007)
The
impact
of
global
freshwater
forcing
on
the
2164
J.-L. Dufresne et al.
123
thermohaline circulation: adjustment of North Atlantic convec-
tion sites in a CGCM. Clim Dyn 28(2):291–305. doi:10.1007/
s00382-006-0171-3
Swingedouw D, Braconnot P, Delecluse P, Guilyardi E, Marti O
(2007) Quantifying the AMOC feedbacks during a 2xCO2
stabilization experiment with land-ice melting. Clim Dyn
29(5):521–534. doi:10.1007/s00382-007-0250-0
Swingedouw D, Mignot J, Braconnot P, Mosquet E, Kageyama M,
Alkama R (2009) Impact of freshwater release in the North
Atlantic under different climate conditions in an OAGCM.
J Clim 22(23):6377–6403. doi:10.1175/2009JCLI3028.1
Swingedouw D, Mignot J, Labetoule S, Guilyardi E, Madec G (2013)
Initialisation and predictability of the AMOC over the last
50 years in a climate model. Clim Dyn. doi:10.1007/s00382-
012-1516-8
Szopa S, Balkanski Y, Schulz M, Bekki S, Cugnet D, Fortems-
Cheiney A, Turquety S, Cozic A, De´andreis C, Hauglustaine D,
Idelkadi A, Lathie`re J, Marchand M, Yan N, Dufresne JL (2013)
Aerosol and ozone changes as forcing for climate evolution
between 1850 and 2100. Clim Dyn. doi:10.1007/s00382-012-
1408-y
Taylor KE, Stouffer RJ, Meehl GA (2012) An overview of CMIP5
and the experiment design. Bull Am Meteorol Soc 93(4):485–
498. doi:10.1175/BAMS-D-11-00094.1
Terray P (2011) Southern Hemisphere extra-tropical forcing: a new
paradigm for El Nin˜o-Southern Oscillation. Clim Dyn 36(11–12):
2171–2199. doi:10.1007/s00382-010-0825-z
Tiedtke M (1989) A comprehensive mass ﬂux scheme for cumulus
parameterization in large-scale models. Mon Wea Rev 117:
1179–1800
Trenberth KE, Fasullo JT (2012) Tracking Earth’s energy: From El
Nin˜o to global warming. Surv Geophys 33(3–4):413–426. doi:
10.1007/s10712-011-9150-2
Valcke S (2006) OASIS3 user’s guide (prism-2-5). Tech. Rep. TR/
CMGC/06/73, PRISM Report No 3, CERFACS, Toulouse, France
Van Leer B (1977) Towards the ultimate conservative difference
scheme: IV. A new approach to numerical convection. J Com-
putat Phys 23:276–299
Vial J, Osborn TJ, Lott F (2013) Sudden stratospheric warmings and
tropospheric blockings in a multi-century simulation of the
IPSL-CM5A coupled climate model. Clim Dyn doi:10.1007/
s00382-013-1675-2
van Vuuren D, Edmonds J, Kainuma M, Riahi K, Thomson A,
Hibbard K, Hurtt G, Kram T, Krey V, Lamarque JF, Masui T,
Meinshausen M, Nakicenovic N, Smith S, Rose S (2011) The
representative concentration pathways: an overview. Climatic
Change, 1–27. 10.1007/s10584-011-0148-z
Wang YM, Lean JL, Sheeley NR (2005) Modeling the sun’s magnetic
ﬁeld and irradiance since 1713. Astrophys J 625(1):522–538.
doi:10.1086/429689
Wanninkhof R (1992) Relationship between wind-speed and gas-
exchange over the ocean. J Geophys Res Oce 97(C5):7373–
7382. doi:10.1029/92JC00188
Wittenberg AT (2009) Are historical records sufﬁcient to constrain
ENSO simulations? Geophys Res Lett 36. doi:10.1029/2009GL
038710
Xavier PK, Duvel JP, Braconnot P, Doblas-Reyes FJ (2010) An
evaluation metric for intraseasonal variability and its application
to CMIP3 twentieth-century simulations. J Clim 23(13):3497–
3508. doi:10.1175/2010JCLI3260a.1
IPSL-CM5 Earth System Model
2165
123
