RESEARCH
Open Access
Host-associated microbiomes are predicted
by immune system complexity and climate
Douglas C. Woodhams1,2*†
, Molly C. Bletz1†, C. Guilherme Becker3, Hayden A. Bender1, Daniel Buitrago-Rosas1,2,
Hannah Diebboll1, Roger Huynh1, Patrick J. Kearns1, Jordan Kueneman2, Emmi Kurosawa1, Brandon C. LaBumbard1,
Casandra Lyons1, Kerry McNally4,5, Klaus Schliep1, Nachiket Shankar1, Amanda G. Tokash-Peters1,6,
Miguel Vences7 and Ross Whetstone1
Abstract
Background: Host-associated microbiomes, the microorganisms occurring inside and on host surfaces,
influence evolutionary, immunological, and ecological processes. Interactions between host and microbiome
affect metabolism and contribute to host adaptation to changing environments. Meta-analyses of host-
associated bacterial communities have the potential to elucidate global-scale patterns of microbial community
structure and function. It is possible that host surface-associated (external) microbiomes respond more
strongly to variations in environmental factors, whereas internal microbiomes are more tightly linked to host
factors.
Results: Here, we use the dataset from the Earth Microbiome Project and accumulate data from 50 additional
studies totaling 654 host species and over 15,000 samples to examine global-scale patterns of bacterial
diversity and function. We analyze microbiomes from non-captive hosts sampled from natural habitats and
find patterns with bioclimate and geophysical factors, as well as land use, host phylogeny, and trophic level/
diet. Specifically, external microbiomes are best explained by variations in mean daily temperature range and
precipitation seasonality. In contrast, internal microbiomes are best explained by host factors such as
phylogeny/immune complexity and trophic level/diet, plus climate.
Conclusions: Internal microbiomes are predominantly associated with top-down effects, while climatic factors
are stronger determinants of microbiomes on host external surfaces. Host immunity may act on microbiome
diversity through top-down regulation analogous to predators in non-microbial ecosystems. Noting gaps in
geographic and host sampling, this combined dataset represents a global baseline available for interrogation
by future microbial ecology studies.
Keywords: Biodiversity, Gut microbiome, Microbial ecology, Skin microbiome, Symbiosis, Wolbachia
Background
“A memory-based immune system may have evolved in
vertebrates because of the need to recognize and manage
complex communities of beneficial microbes.”—McFall-
Ngai 2007 [1].
While global patterns of diversity and biogeography
have been extensively studied in animals and plants, they
are much less understood in microbes. In soil micro-
biomes, pH has been found to be a strong driver of eco-
system type [2], while in another study, environmental
microbiomes were primarily driven by salinity [3]. The
recent Earth Microbiome Project found that host micro-
biomes were distinct from environmental microbiomes,
and for hosts, ecosystem type was an important driver.
Microbiomes of plants and animals differed strongly,
and
host
surfaces
were
different
from
digestive-
associated microbiomes [4]. A large study examining
© The Author(s). 2020, corrected publication 2020. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.
* Correspondence: dwoodhams@gmail.com
†Douglas C. Woodhams and Molly C. Bletz are co-first authors.
1Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts Boston, Boston, MA
02125, USA
2Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, Roosevelt Ave. Tupper Building –
401, 0843-03092 Panamá, Panama
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
Woodhams et al. Genome Biology           (2020) 21:23 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-019-1908-8
skin surface microbiomes across 205 amphibian species
found strong correlations with bioclimatic factors [5],
while digestive microbiomes of mammals were influenced
by diet and gut morphology, and indeed distinct from en-
vironmental microbiomes [6]. A substantial role of biotic
interactions in shaping microbial communities was also
obvious from a strong bacterial-fungal antagonism re-
vealed by global patterns in topsoil and ocean micro-
biomes [7], a pattern also revealed on hosts [8–11].
These studies are foundational for understanding
large-scale microbial ecology patterns. Here, we use
data of host-associated bacterial communities from the
Earth Microbiome Project and 50 additional studies
that meet our criteria for inclusion to produce a large
dataset for analysis through a standardized pipeline
(Fig. 1a). We examine 654 non-captive host species in-
cluding plants, and invertebrate and vertebrate animals
and perform separate analyses for digestive-associated
(internal)
and
surface-associated
(external)
micro-
biomes from marine or terrestrial/aquatic habitats.
With an increasing diversity of hosts examined for sym-
biosis with microbes, mechanisms driving these host-
microbe interactions will become clear [12]. We hy-
pothesized that external host-associated microbiomes
would most strongly correlate with global bioclimate or
other abiotic factors, while internal microbiomes would
be more strongly associated with host factors such as
phylogeny, and trophic level or diet.
Diverse microbial communities can assemble and
coevolve with hosts and contribute important or even
essential functions for host development, physiology,
and health [13, 14]. Detrimental alterations in the
host’s microbiome, or "dysbiosis", can lead to disease;
thus, baseline descriptions of functional microbiomes
are essential [15, 16]. In the future, personalized medi-
cine may utilize the microbiome for biomarkers for
conditions of disease or health [17], and disease pro-
gression may be more readily predicted and described
by changes in microbiota than by clinical symptoms or
the presence of certain pathogenic agents [18, 19].
Functional characterization may be more meaningful
than identity in microbial community profiles due to
functional redundancy among microbes [20, 21]. How-
ever, characterizing core (prevalent among individuals)
microbial communities may also be utilized to develop
screening tools for host health or to understand eco-
evolutionary dynamics [22, 23]. Here, we hypothesized
that internal microbiomes may represent an extension
of host phenotype; rather than functioning to reduce
microbial diversity, complexity in host immune sys-
tems may be correlated with microbiome diversity
across taxa. Furthermore, host microbiomes may be
more strongly differentiated by predicted community
function than by community composition given a
multitude
of
species
with
overlapping
functional
capacities.
Meta-analysis of microbiomes through the growing
body of next-generation sequencing data represents a
new tool for ecologists and is a systematic approach to
combining the results of multiple studies and synthesiz-
ing relevant data to gain new insights [4, 24]. This tech-
nique allows the synthesis of regional- and local-scale
data to elucidate global-scale patterns of microbial com-
munity structure, function, and interaction, with indica-
tions for public health and extending to environmental
policy [25]. Meta-analysis has been increasingly recog-
nized as an important scientific approach, with many
prominent researchers proposing standards for, and en-
couraging, its continued widespread use [25–27]. Hu-
man microbiomes have been the target of several meta-
analyses, revealing insights that indicate microbial in-
volvement in health as well as disease [28], and deter-
mining core microbiota associated with body sites [29].
Some meta-analyses have synthesized data in order to
investigate disease, physiologic, and developmental states
with large effect sizes [30, 31]. Meta-analyses of non-
human host taxa have found a potential link of conver-
gent microbial symbioses between fish and mammals
with salinity and trophic level being important drivers of
fish gut microbiomes [32]. While diet also impacts mam-
mal gut microbiomes [6], a study of 18 wild non-human
primates indicated that the influence of host physiology
and phylogeny was much stronger than diet [33]. Host
selection also was found to be more important than diet
or captivity status in avian guts [34]. Some key questions
for microbiome meta-analyses are featured in Table 1,
and while host-microbiome datasets are accumulating
with time (Fig. 2), knowledge gaps are identified includ-
ing gaps in regions sampled (Fig. 1b) and host groups
with unstudied microbiomes (Fig. 3). Importantly, the
eukaryotic and viral components of the microbiome re-
main a research frontier. The bacterial microbiome data-
set and metadata accumulated here is a public resource
and may provide future eco-evolutionary, veterinary, or
medical insights. As an example, we investigate the bio-
climatic correlates of the abundance of an arthropod
symbiont that is increasingly important for disease vec-
tor control (Wolbachia [59, 60]) across the global dataset
we assembled.
Results
After combining microbiome datasets targeting the V4
region of 16S rRNA gene obtained from Illumina plat-
forms and using a standard analysis pipeline (Fig. 1a)
[61]
to
identify
sub-Operational
Taxonomic
Units
(sOTUS), or unique sequence variants [27], we were able
to compare data from 654 host species distributed glo-
bally. Samples ranged from 46 countries in 7 biomes and
Woodhams et al. Genome Biology           (2020) 21:23 
Page 2 of 20
from hosts including marine sponges 490 m below the
sea surface to bar-headed geese at 3955 m elevation in
the Himalayas. While representing a global sampling of
hosts, visual inspection of the map of global distribution
of samples suggests that hosts from much of Africa and
Asia
are
underrepresented
(Fig.
1b),
and
many
eukaryotic clades have not been sampled, thus providing
ample opportunities for future research (Fig. 3). We sub-
set the 15,790 samples into 3 non-overlapping groups
for separate analyses: internal (N = 741 samples), exter-
nal (N = 1193), and marine external microbiomes (N =
266; Table 2, Fig. 1a). Given what has already been de-
scribed by the Earth Microbiome Project, separate ana-
lyses are warranted based on host ecosystem type
(marine as distinct from terrestrial/aquatic) and host in-
ternal or external body site [3].
For marine organisms, our analysis was limited to avail-
able external samples. For terrestrial/aquatic organisms,
Fig. 1 Method schematic and geographic distribution of samples analyzed. a Method schematic for data attainment and compilation, data
processing, and data splitting into three distinct subsets for subsequent analyses. b Map of the coverage of samples included in this study. Three
types of host microbiome samples are represented: internal (squares), external (triangles), and marine external (circles). Sampling points are color-
scaled by sub-Operational Taxonomic Unit (sOTU) richness. Areas with small territory size (such as Central America and Hawaiian Archipelago) and
many sampling points with different types of samples (Madagascar) are shown zoomed-in in separate boxes. Map created with QGIS (Quantum
GIS Development Team 2013) using a base global map from Natural Earth (naturalearthdata.com) with all geographic coordinates standardized to
decimal degrees
Woodhams et al. Genome Biology           (2020) 21:23 
Page 3 of 20
we divided analyses between internal and external sam-
ples. Internal microbiomes were primarily associated with
the digestive system or whole organism samples in the
case of insects. While the microbial communities in in-
sects can differ with surface or organ sampled, for the sake
of our analysis, we classified whole organism tissues as in-
ternal (Fig. 1a). This is consistent with descriptions of gut
microbiomes driving the community structure of whole-
organism samples [62], and the lower quantity of bacterial
cells on human skin vs. large intestine, for example [63].
External microbiomes were sampled from host surfaces
including the skin, gill, or leaves, and analyzed separately.
We assembled an extensive collection of metadata for
each sampled host, including host taxonomy, life stage,
trophic level, and body site sampled, as well as environ-
mental factors for each sampling location such as
macroclimate metrics of temperature and precipitation,
land cover, and elevation. We then visualized the domin-
ant microbial taxa from each host class separately by
host habitat and body region (internal, external; Fig. 4,
Additional file 1: Figure S3), and performed analyses of
alpha and beta diversity metrics. Results of all analyses
can be reproduced with the data included in Add-
itional files 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12 (see the
“Methods” section and Additional file 1 for a description
of the data files provided), or re-analyzed in the future
as bioinformatics techniques continue to improve.
To analyze alpha diversity, including richness (num-
ber of sOTUs) and phylogenetic diversity of sOTUs,
we carried out model selection (Additional file 1:
Table S1), resulting in a reduced set of variables for
inclusion in downstream path analyses: a temperature
metric and a precipitation metric, normalized differ-
ence vegetation index (NDVI), and host phylogeny
and trophic diet. Path analysis was used to test for
the magnitude and significance of hypothesized causal
connections and to determine direct vs. indirect influ-
ences on alpha diversity. Separate path models were
run to examine how variables interacted to impact
microbiome phylogenetic diversity or richness and
were performed separately for internal and external
microbiomes (Fig. 5). Latitude was excluded from
path analyses because of multicollinearity with cli-
matic variables (analyzed separately in Additional file 1:
Figure S2).
Patterns of beta-diversity were analyzed by permuta-
tional analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) to deter-
mine variables of greatest importance in structuring
the microbial communities (Additional file 1: Table
S2).
Internal
microbiomes
were
most
significantly
structured by host class (explaining 14% of the vari-
ation), as well as trophic diet, several bioclimatic fac-
tors, latitude, elevation, and NDVI (Additional file 1:
Table S2). A principal coordinates analysis illustrates
clustering of internal microbiome by host class and
depicts the higher microbial diversity found in sam-
ples of mammals, amphibians, birds, and non-avian
reptiles (crocodile and iguana) as compared to insects
and carnivorous plants (Fig. 6a; Additional file 1: Ta-
bles S2, S3). External microbiomes were structured
most strongly by bioclimatic factors (bioclim2 and
bioclim15 explaining 60% and 7% of variation, re-
spectively), as well as external habitat type (5%) as
compared
to
host
class
(not
significant;
Add-
itional file 1: Table S2). Bioclim2 is a measure of
mean diurnal temperature range and most signifi-
cantly structured the external microbiome (Fig. 6b,
Additional file 1: Figure S3). Because our dataset was
heavily filtered to standardize sampling among host
species
and
locales,
we
verified
that
we
retained
power to detect previously described patterns. For ex-
ample, four human populations included in the data-
set
recapitulated
previously
described
patterns
including greater gut microbiome diversity in develop-
ing countries ([64]; Additional file 1: Figure S4).
Table 1 Outstanding questions in host-microbiome research.
Host-microbiome research is an emerging field. Knowledge gaps
include the eukaryotic and viral components of the microbiome
[35–37], novel bacterial clades and uncultured microbes [38–40],
and large gaps in the geography and host taxa sampled for
microbiome studies. Most studies to date have focused on
human or other mammalian gut microbiomes, agricultural plants,
and fish studies focused on aquaculture, leaving other vertebrate
and invertebrate hosts underrepresented. Wild samples are
needed to overcome alterations due to captivity [41, 42]. Recent
efforts to place microbiomes within a macroecology context
described patterns across scales [43], or metacommunity or
community ecology contexts to learn about microbial migration
[44, 45], community assembly and succession [46], and functions
for host health [12, 47–49]
Frontiers in host-microbiome research
1) Are there dormant and active microbiome subsets of the host
microbiome, and how do these subsets change with environmental
conditions [50]? How does microbial antagonism and interaction protect
hosts or facilitate host invasion [11]?
2) What are the effects of environmental change on colonization,
dysbiosis, or adaptive microbiomes? Do abiotic conditions have stronger
effects on ectotherms compared with endothermic hosts? Are microbial
therapies effective [17, 51–53]?
3) What is the significance of core (stable through time and prevalent
among individuals) vs peripheral (transitory or rare) microbiomes or
gene functions including metabolic pathways in host populations, and
is there a trade-off or shift in core microbiome with host immunity,
anatomy, life stage, or environmental conditions? Are core microbiomes
likely to be of use in personalized medicine or disease diagnostics? Are
core microbiomes, particularly of non-human hosts, lost with
industrialization [31, 54, 55]?
4) Metabolomics and functional analyses are a research frontier; do they
require a renewed focus on culture-based research and genome se-
quencing [56–58]?
Woodhams et al. Genome Biology           (2020) 21:23 
Page 4 of 20
Because host class had the strongest association with
the internal microbiome structure, we examined this re-
lationship in greater detail, hypothesizing that predicted
function may provide further discrimination. We used
PICRUSt (Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by
Reconstruction of Unobserved States) to examine func-
tional properties of the internal microbiome [21]. We
characterized the accuracy of this tool by comparing the
weighted Nearest Sequenced Taxon Index (weighted
NSTI) score across host classes and filtering samples
above the cutoff score of 0.06 (Additional file 1: Figure
S5). The major functional categories across host taxa in-
cluded membrane transport, amino acid metabolism,
and carbohydrate metabolism (Additional file 1: Figure
S6). Functional capacities of the internal microbiomes
were structured by similar variables as the microbial
communities including host class (explaining 13% of
variation) as well as trophic diet, bioclimate variables,
latitude, elevation, and NDVI (each explaining less than
5% of variation; Additional file 1: Table S2). Trophic diet
was a significant factor of ecological interest, though
explaining little variation. Some host taxa including Am-
phibia and Teleostei demonstrate developmental shifts
in both trophic level and microbiome [46, 65–67]. A
phylogenetic tree of internal microbiome phyla illus-
trated potential trends by host trophic level/diet in
abundance of major groups such as decreasing Proteo-
bacteria and increasing Firmicutes at higher trophic
levels (Fig. 7). Profiles of carnivorous plants were distinct
from animal carnivores. Shifts in major classes with four
bacterial phyla are illustrated in Fig. 7b.
Eco-evolutionary patterns in immune complexity were
examined to test a mechanistic hypothesis explaining
trends in host microbiome diversity. Hosts with adaptive
immune systems had significantly greater microbiome
richness and phylogenetic diversity than hosts with only
innate immunity (Wilcoxon, P < 0.001; Fig. 8a). Com-
plexity of host immune systems at a broad level was cor-
related with
microbiome
diversity
(Fig. 8b). While
strongly correlated with host phylogeny, the complexity
of adaptive immune systems across hosts based on a re-
view by Flajnik [68] was developed into a matrix and
score for each host class (Additional file 1: Table S3). In-
clusion of the scale of adaptive immune system com-
plexity in the path model for internal microbiomes
indicated a significant direct association with microbial
phylogenetic diversity (Fig. 9).
The role and maintenance of core members of host
microbiomes
remains
a
research
frontier,
and
we
hypothesize a trade-off between immune complexity
and abundance of core microbes defined specifically
at the strain level (Table 1). A preliminary analysis
based on a permissive definition of core bacteria (80%
prevalence
among
samples)
is
presented
in
Add-
itional file 1: Table S3.
The dataset we assembled provides a broad overview
of factors driving host microbiome structure, function,
and diversity (Figs. 4, 5, and 6). It also provides a re-
source for comparative microbial ecology. As an ex-
ample of its utility, we scrutinized the dataset for global
trends in the distribution of Wolbachia, a genus of com-
mon Gram-negative bacteria known to be reproductive
Fig. 2 Trends in published host-microbiome studies through time. Data based on a custom keyword statements within NCBI PubMed
Woodhams et al. Genome Biology           (2020) 21:23 
Page 5 of 20
parasites and serving as mosquito disease vector control
agents; our data confirm these bacteria being mainly
present in insects (Table 3) and find them most abun-
dant in cool environments of the globe (Fig. 10). At a
global scale, we thus describe novel patterns and lay the
groundwork for future mechanistic studies on host-
microbiome interactions.
Discussion
The assembly and composition of host-associated micro-
biomes are attendant with forces of ecology, evolution,
host physiology, and immune function. Here, we exam-
ine microbiomes from 654 host species and begin where
our current understanding trails off. That is, at the
broadest scale, microbiomes can be differentiated first by
free-living or host-association according to the Earth
Microbiome Project Ontology ([4]; Additional file 1: Fig-
ure S1), likely driven by both biotic and abiotic pres-
sures.
Salinity
has
a
large
effect
on
free-living
microbiomes [4], and here, we analyze microbiomes on
external host surfaces of marine organisms separately
from those of terrestrial and aquatic hosts. Many other
factors influence or interact with host microbiomes, and
here, we examine whether these factors differ depending
on whether the microbiome is from external host sur-
faces such as leaves, gill, or skin, or is internal to the
host, including communities in the digestive and repro-
ductive
systems.
Host
immune
complexity,
though
strongly correlated with host phylogeny, appears to in-
fluence both internal and external microbiomes in terms
of diversity and community structure (Figs. 8 and 9). In-
deed, internal microbiome phylogenetic diversity had a
weak direct path from host phylogeny, but a strong
Fig. 3 Phylogenetic tree of selected eukaryotic hosts at the class level. Numbers adjacent to black circles indicate the number of species included
in our dataset from that class. Groups’ missing microbiome data are evident; however, only studies focusing on the V4 region of the rRNA gene
were included. Tree was retrieved from TimeTree (http://www.timetree.org), which aggregates taxonomic and phylogenetic information from
published literature. Interact with this tree at IToL: https://itol.embl.de/tree/1306494203341921544122745
Woodhams et al. Genome Biology           (2020) 21:23 
Page 6 of 20
Table 2 Summary statistics and metadata fields for the full dataset, partitioned for analyses by internal or external microbiomes of
terrestrial and freshwater host organisms
Metadata field
Description
Full dataset
Internal
External
Marine_
external
Samples
sample runs included in this study
15,790
741
1193
266
sOTU
exact sequence variants (sub-operational taxonomic units)
175,709
17,544a
28,410a
5.077a
Publications (by doi)
digital object identifier accession number of published studies
51
23
13
6
Host Kingdom
https://www.itis.gov or http://www.eol.org
2
2
2
2
Host Phyllum
https://www.itis.gov or http://www.eol.org
8
3
2
4
Host Class
https://www.itis.gov or http://www.eol.org
16
7
5
8
Host Order
https://www.itis.gov or http://www.eol.org
80
26
23
27
Host Family
https://www.itis.gov or http://www.eol.org
177
65
52
45
Host Genus
https://www.itis.gov or http://www.eol.org
427
171
106
58
Host species name
full scientific name of host organism
654
204
239
78
Host taxid
taxa id number for the host species from NCBI Taxonomy
Browser
640
197
236
78
Collection timestamp
date of sampling in DD/MM/YYYY format
1069
143
173
108
Countries
country from which samples were collected
46
26
18
20
Latitude range (deg)
latitude in decimal degrees
-43.53 to
60.17
-37.94 to 60.17
-39.84 to
52.28
-43.14 to
51.73
Longitude range
(deg)
longitude in decimal degrees
-157.79 to
174.83
-121.79 to 152.31
-122.83 to
138.94
-157.79 to
174.83
Elevation range (m)
GPS coordinates used to estimate elevation if not stated in
study
-490 to
3955
-3 to 3955
17 to 3837
-490 to 25
microbial_habitat_
type
internal, external, and whole organism
3
internal and whole
organism
external
external
internal_habitat_type
digestive-associated, oral, nasal, lung, reproductive, leaf
internal, root internal, and n/a
8
1
n/a
n/a
digestive_habitat_
type
foregut, fecal, cloacal, intestine, stomach, other and n/a
7
5
n/a
n/a
external_habitat_type
leaf surface, root surface, animal surface, gill, and n/a
5
n/a
4
3
surrounding_habitat
freshwater, marine, terrestrial
3
freshwater,
terrestrial
freshwater,
terrestrial
marine
lifestage
adult, juvenile/pupae, larvae, and infant
4
4
3
2
sampling_month
month when the samples were collected
12
12
12
12
trophic_diet
scaled 0=primary producers, 1=herbivore, 2=omnivore, 3=
carnivore, 4=detritivore/scavenger
5
5
n/a
n/a
preservation_method
sample storage by direct freeze, ethanol, RNA-later, or other
4
4
3
2
extraction_method
name of DNA extraction kit
15
5
6
2
biogeo_realm
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biogeographic_realm
7
6
5
4
Worldclim2
bioclimatic variables
http://worldclim.org/version2; Fick et al 2017
n/a
8
8
n/a
Marine geophysical
variables
http://marspec.weebly.com/about.html; Sbrocco et al 2013
n/a
n/a
n/a
11
Immune Complexity
(binary)
inferred from host class information
n/a
2
2
n/a
Immune Complexity
(ordinal)
scale based on Flajnik et al 2018;
n/a
1-9
1-9
n/a
asOTUs after rarefaction at 1000 reads per sample
Woodhams et al. Genome Biology           (2020) 21:23 
Page 7 of 20
indirect path from host phylogeny through immune
complexity (Fig. 9).
Our analysis revealed that internal (digestive-associated)
microbiome diversity was predominantly shaped by host
factors, while external (surface-associated) microbiome di-
versity was strongly associated with normalized difference
vegetation index (NDVI) and some climatic factors such
as precipitation of the warmest quarter (Bioclim18; Fig. 5).
Similarly, a recent study of amphibian skin microbiomes
found higher diversity on hosts in environments with
colder winters and less stable thermal conditions (i.e.,
temperate regions [5];). Thus, increasing climatic variabil-
ity appears to promote coexistence and diversity of exter-
nal microbiomes, perhaps through ecological succession
Fig. 4 Taxonomic and function composition of host microbial communities across host classes and microbial habitats. a Internal microbiomes of
terrestrial and freshwater organisms, b external microbiomes of terrestrial and freshwater organisms, and c external microbiomes of marine
organisms. Each color represents a unique bacterial phylum. A legend for microbial taxa including bacterial phyla and Archaea is provided
Woodhams et al. Genome Biology           (2020) 21:23 
Page 8 of 20
or dormancy mechanisms [5]. Nottingham et al. [69]
found that both plant diversity and soil microbiome diver-
sity follow temperature (and elevation) gradients at a re-
gional scale with more species under warmer conditions.
At a global scale, the external plant microbiome richness
was also negatively correlated with elevation (Pearson’s
correlation, N = 85, r = −0.324, P = 0.002), but mean an-
nual temperature was not significantly correlated with
these plant microbiomes (r = −0.174, P = 0.111). Path ana-
lysis of our external microbiome dataset containing 33
plant host species did not show a significant effect of
temperature on microbiome richness, but rather greater
diversity with lower NDVI (Fig. 5). While host factors did
not play a significant role in external microbiomes at the
global scale, they can be important divers of host micro-
biomes locally (e.g., [70]).
Internal microbiome diversity was most strongly driven
by host factors including host phylogeny and, to a weaker
extent, diet or trophic level (Figs. 4, 5, and 6). Similarly, a
study focused on non-human primates found that host
phylogeny had a larger impact than dietary niche on gut
microbiomes [33]. This finding is also supported by stud-
ies in other taxa including larval amphibians and aquatic
invertebrates [71]. Previous studies found a more promin-
ent role of host diet in shaping the gut microbiome [72,
73], particularly within clades such as lizards [74], fish [32,
67, 75], birds [76, 77], or mammals [78]. Captivity may
produce bottom-up effects on microbiomes by altering
environmental conditions and diets from field conditions
[41]. Our data mirror macroecological patterns (e.g.,
Paine’s keystone predation [79];) and suggest that bottom-
up processes of nutrient conditions shaped by host diet
Fig. 5 Path analyses showing direct and indirect effects of the best abiotic and biotic predictors of number of sOTUs (left) and phylogenetic
diversity (right). Models explaining internal (a), and external microbiome diversity (b) are shown. Numbers are standardized path coefficients (*P <
0.05). Blue arrows depict positive associations whereas red arrows depict negative effects. Gray arrows depict non-significant paths. The thickness
of the arrows represents the relative strength of each relationship. Bioclimatic variables include the following: Isothermality (Bio3), Mean
Temperature of Driest Quarter (Bio9), Precipitation of Driest Month (Bio14), and Precipitation of Warmest Quarter (Bio18)
Woodhams et al. Genome Biology           (2020) 21:23 
Page 9 of 20
Fig. 6 Principal coordinates analysis of Unifrac distances. a Internal microbiomes, colored by host class, and size-scaled by microbial phylogenetic
diversity. Host class explained 13.9% of the variation in community structure (Additional file 1: Table S2). b External microbiomes, color scale
white-red corresponding to low-high Mean Diurnal Temperature Range (Bio2; Mean of monthly (max temp–min temp)). Bio2 explained 59.6% of
the variation in external microbiome community structure (Additional file 1: Table S2)
Woodhams et al. Genome Biology           (2020) 21:23 
Page 10 of 20
have weaker effects on microbiome diversity and structure
than do the top-down processes of host physiology and
immune function. Just as abiotic factors can influence or
reverse top-down effects of predators on ecosystem func-
tion [80], the relative strength of host immune function
may be similarly disrupted (e.g., antibiotics, immunocom-
promise) and have strong influences on the host micro-
biome ([15, 17, 31]; Table 1).
Host immune systems are thought to function in redu-
cing microbes, commonly maligned as germs. We found,
perhaps counterintuitively, that a greater diversity of
bacteria are hosted by organisms with more complex
adaptive immune systems (Figs. 8 and 9). Indeed, we
would add to Mcfall-Ngai’s [1] prescient framework
quoted above and suggest that core bacteria that are
more abundant in organisms with exclusively innate im-
munity may trade off this stability with more complex
immune function during the evolution of adaptive im-
munity [68]. Indeed, top-down effects of immune func-
tion may be analogous to predation effects and promote
maintenance of diversity by decreasing competition and
allowing coexistence [79]. Understanding these patterns
may encourage forward thinking responses to current
environmental impacts affecting microbiome evolution
and host health ([81, 82]; Table 1).
Conclusions
Several reviews have highlighted the need for standard-
ized data collection methods and greater taxonomic
breadth and sampling of wild hosts, considered the least
investigated compared with domestic and model host
species [67, 81, 83]. Wild hosts may provide the greatest
insight on host evolutionary biology and ecology, since
captivity can have dramatic impacts on the microbiome
[41, 42]. Understanding how host-associated micro-
biomes are naturally assembled and influenced by abiotic
and host conditions provides insight on potential reser-
voirs of microbiota and can inform metacommunity
models that predict community structure and transmis-
sion of microbes or dispersal and feedback between
hosts and habitats [44, 84]. While there remain wide
geographical (Fig. 1) and taxonomic gaps (Fig. 3) in
host-microbiome studies, our large sample set enabled
the description of global-scale patterns in both internal
(gut and reproductive tract) as well as external surface
(leaves, skin, gill) microbiomes. Using a standardized
Fig. 7 Bacterial abundance across trophic diets. a Phylogenetic tree of major bacterial phyla and their abundance by trophic diet for internal
microbiota. The size of the circle depicts the proportion of a given bacterial group within the community by the trophic diet. b Abundance of
major bacterial classes of selected bacterial phyla across trophic diet for internal microbiota
Woodhams et al. Genome Biology           (2020) 21:23 
Page 11 of 20
Fig. 8 Immune system complexity associations with diversity of host microbiomes. a Mean richness and phylogenetic diversity (external and
internal microbiomes) for host genera with adaptive immune systems is significantly greater than host genera with only innate immunity. *P <
0.001, Wilcoxon tests. b Mean internal sOTU richness correlates with adaptive immune system complexity based on the Flajnik [68] comparative
immunology scale (see Additional file 1: Table S3)
Fig. 9 Path model of internal microbiomes depicting direct and indirect effects of immune complexity in the context of the best biotic and
abiotic predictors of microbial phylogenetic diversity. Numbers are standardized path coefficients. Blue arrows depict positive associations
whereas red arrows depict negative effects at P < 0.05. Gray arrows depict non-significant paths. The thickness of the arrows represents the
relative strength of each relationship
Woodhams et al. Genome Biology           (2020) 21:23 
Page 12 of 20
approach, we found compelling evidence that internal
vs. external microbiomes differ in the predominant fac-
tors associated with diversity and composition. Our ana-
lysis also revealed several correlations that at first
glance were counterintuitive, such as microbiome di-
versity increasing with host immune system complex-
ity, that suggest previously unrecognized top-down
regulating effects. The analysis of Wolbachia occur-
rence and diversity across hosts and environments ex-
emplifies the data mining potential of the metadata
set assembled for this study. We anticipate that the
identified patterns will be instrumental in deriving
testable hypotheses and therefore have great potential
to stimulate exciting experimental tests to elucidate
the underlying mechanisms.
Methods
Sequence acquisition
To investigate global patterns of microbiome diversity
and structure across host systems, we performed stan-
dardized bioinformatics analysis on combined datasets
and procured environmental and host-associated meta-
data. We focused on studies with targeted 16S rRNA
gene sequence data obtained from an Illumina platform.
Table 3 Taxonomic classes with positive detection of Wolbachia-specific sOTUs
Taxonomic class
Average reads per samplea
Number of unique Wolbachia sOTUs
within class (total = 33)b
Percentage of Wolbachia sOTUs
found in Insectac
Amphibia
0.131
12
41.7
Demospongiae
0.007
1
100.0
Insecta
33.305
23
100.0
Magnoliopsida
0.024
1
0.0
Mammalia
0.002
4
75.0
Phaeophyceae
0.003
1
100.0
aInsecta had a substantially higher number of average Wolbachia reads than any other class. Most other Wolbachia-positive samples were rare and found in
organisms where insects are a substantial portion of the diet (e.g., amphibia, bats, carnivorous plants), and as some of the host samples were derived from the
gut, this is to be expected. Interestingly, Demospongiae were positive for Wolbachia, which may indicate that there were marine arthropods living within the
sponges that were Wolbachia-positive
bInsecta showed the highest number of unique Wolbachia sOTUs present within each class. Amphibia was high in the number of unique sOTUs, and many of
these amphibian samples were taken from the gut
cCalculating the relative percentage of sOTUs found within each class that are also found within class Insecta indicated that the majority of sOTUs attributed to
other host samples can be found in Insecta (likely as part of the diet of the host), and the remaining sOTUs are likely insects that are not present as directly
collected samples in the dataset that were also prey items to their hosts. A heatmap showing mean abundance of each Wolbachia sOTU is presented in
Additional file 1: Figure S8
Fig. 10 Wolbachia in insects are globally diverse and decrease in abundance with temperature range. Maximum temperature of the warmest
month (Bioclim5) and mean diurnal temperature range (Bioclim2) negatively predict relative Wolbachia abundance in samples derived from
insects. Blue lines indicate 95% confidence limits. Details can be found in Additional file 1: Figure S8. This is one example of how this global
microbiome dataset can be used to better understand and analyze host-microbe interactions
Woodhams et al. Genome Biology           (2020) 21:23 
Page 13 of 20
A literature search was conducted to identify relevant
studies with data accessible from public databases. The
majority of sample sequences were downloaded from the
Sequence Read Archive (SRA) of the National Center for
Biotechnology Information (NCBI), the European Nu-
cleotide Archive (ENA), MG-RAST, and Qiita repositor-
ies.
The combined dataset is made
available here
(Additional file 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12), and
accession numbers and DOIs for all published studies
are indicated in the mapping (metadata) files described
in Additional file 1.
Datasets were selected that followed the Earth Micro-
biome Project (EMP) protocols and standards (http://
www.earthmicrobiome.org/protocols-and-standards/).
Studies were first screened to ensure certain criteria
were met, including (1) collected from a “wild setting,”
where hosts were not exposed to any experimental treat-
ments; (2) ethanol preserved or frozen until DNA ex-
traction; (3) targeted the V4 region of the 16S rRNA
bacterial gene region, using primers 515f and 806r [85];
and (4) sequencing on Illumina MiSeq or Illumina HiSeq
platforms. Once a study passed our inclusion filters, we
downloaded fastq files and obtained metadata for each
study. The compiled dataset is comprised of 15,790 sam-
ples from 51 studies including all host-associated data
from the Earth Microbiome Project [4] and includes 16
host classes (Fig. 3) from plants to corals to vertebrates
(including 4 human populations; Additional file 1: Figure
S4, [9, 50–58, 85–121]).
Sequence preparation
Sequence data were quality filtered using Quantitative
Insights into Microbial Ecology (QIIME) defaults and
classified
into
sub-Operational
Taxonomic
Units
(sOTUS, or unique sequence variants) using the De-
blur
workflow
[27].
Within
Deblur,
reads
were
trimmed to 90 bp to correspond with the shortest
read length in the combined dataset. Taxonomy was
assigned using the RDP Classifier with GreenGenes
13-8 as reference through a custom bash script [122,
123]. Then, sOTUs with fewer than 90 reads, taxo-
nomically assigned as “mitochondria” and “chloro-
plast,” or not identifiable at the Kingdom level were
removed. A phylogenetic tree was built with fasttree2
[124]. Samples were rarefied at 1000 sequences per
sample to retain most samples, normalize read counts
across samples, and reduce computational demands.
Furthermore, we standardized sampling across loca-
tions and host species by randomly selecting up to 10
samples from a given host species at a given country
(see Table 2 for overall sample sizes and number of
unique sOTUs). Datasets before and after processing
as described above can be found in the Additional
files.
General analysis framework and datasets
We employed multiple statistical approaches, including
general linearized models, permutational multivariate
analysis of variance, and path models, to explore the
main drivers of host-associated microbial diversity, com-
munity structure (i.e., beta diversity), and PICRUSt-
predicted functionality. Tests also targeted hypotheses
surrounding how immune function may shape diversity
and composition of host microbiomes and how the dis-
tribution of Wolbachia varies across bioclimates.
For our analyses, the data were divided into 3 main sub-
sets: (i) an internal microbiome dataset comprised of 741
samples derived from internal host habitats or whole-body
samples, (ii) an external microbiome dataset comprised of
1193 samples derived from external host surfaces, and (iii)
a marine dataset comprised of 266 external surface sam-
ples from marine organisms. Table 2 provides detailed in-
formation on sample types included in each dataset. The
geographic distribution of these samples is depicted in
Fig. 1. Additional data files for each subset are provided as
indicated in Additional file 1.
Sample metadata and predictor variables
For each sample, we tabulated a comprehensive set of
abiotic and biotic predictor variables for testing targeted
hypotheses and inclusion in model-based analyses of our
datasets. Associated metadata included in the mapping
file was gathered by downloading the metadata for each
study, taken directly from the paper corresponding to
the study, or obtained from publicly available databases.
Table 2 provides a description of each metadata field.
Elevation data was extracted from Google Earth using
latitude/longitude coordinates. Current bioclimatic vari-
ables representing temperature and precipitation (1 km
resolution) were extracted for each unique geographic
location from the WorldClim2 database. These 19 biocli-
matic variables were extrapolated from a global network
of stations collecting data from 1970 to 2000 [125].
Eighteen marine and geophysical variables were ex-
tracted from the MARSPEC database at the same 1 km
resolution [126] for the marine dataset models. The vari-
ables of interest are defined in Additional file 1: Table
S1 and below. Because of expected high correlation be-
tween many Worldclim bioclimatic variables, we filtered
these predictors to a least correlated subset. From the 19
bioclim variables, we selected the 8 least correlated ones
(caret package in R [127]) based on a threshold of r <
0.7. These least correlated variables included Mean Diur-
nal Temperature Range (Bio2), Isothermality (Bio3),
Max Temperature of Warmest Month (Bio5), Mean
Temperature of Driest Quarter (Bio9), Precipitation of
Driest Month (Bio14), Precipitation Seasonality (Bio15),
Precipitation of Warmest Quarter (Bio18), and Precipita-
tion of Coldest Quarter (Bio19) and were included in
Woodhams et al. Genome Biology           (2020) 21:23 
Page 14 of 20
model selection procedures described below. The same
procedure was performed for the 18 marine biophysical
predictors resulting in the following least correlated sub-
set: bathymetry, east/west aspect (biogeo1), north/south
aspect (biogeo2), plane curviture (biogeo3), distance to
shore (biogeo5), bathymetric slope (biogeo6), concavity
(biogeo7), sea surface salinity of the saltiest month (bio-
geo10), annual variance of sea surface salinity (bio-
geo12), sea surface temperature of warmest month
(biogeo15), and annual range of sea surface temperature
(biogeo16).
Biotic predictors included host identity (host class or
host phylogeny), host trophic diet (for internal dataset),
external surface type, and immune system complexity.
Either host class or a numeric nMDS proxy of host phyl-
ogeny was used to represent host identity. Host class in-
formation was obtained from the Encyclopedia of Life
database (https://eol.org/). The host phylogeny proxy
was created via the following steps. First, using timetree.
org, we recovered a time-calibrated phylogenetic tree of
host species represented in our study [128]. Second, pa-
tristic pairwise distances, i.e., branch lengths separating
taxa, were then calculated with the Ape and Adephylo
packages in R [129, 130]. Third, we performed non-
metric multidimensional scaling (nMDS), constrained to
one dimension, on the patristic distance matrix in SPSS
v24 (IBM Corp, Armonk, NY, USA) to create a univari-
ate host phylogeny variable for use in model-based ana-
lyses. The nMDS proxy phylogeny variable was chosen
because
it
captured
the
phylogenetic
relationships
among hosts and is a numeric variable available for path
analyses. Host trophic diet levels was estimated based on
the diet category, including primary producers (level 0),
herbivores (1), omnivores (2), carnivores (3), and scaven-
gers/detritivores (4). External surface type information
was obtained from data available with sequence archives
and the published papers. Immune system complexity
was estimated in two ways: (i) as a binary categorical
variable indicating whether the host possessed an adap-
tive or innate only immune system, and (ii) as an ordinal
scale derived from immune system characteristics from
Flajnik [68] (Additional file 1: Table S3).
Analysis of alpha diversity
Model selection procedures implementing generalized
linear models (GLMs) and comprehensive path models
were used to analyze alpha diversity for each of our
datasets. We performed GLM model selection proce-
dures to identify which of our main biotic and abiotic
variables best predicted richness, measured as number
of sOTUs and Faith’s Phylogenetic Diversity for each of
our three main datasets. More specifically, for internal,
external, and marine microbiomes, we screened a total
of 25 explanatory variables, including host phylogeny/
identity, trophic diet (internal only), external habitat
types (marine only), absolute latitude, elevation, nor-
malized index vegetation index (NDVI; external only), 8
least cross-correlated bioclimatic variables (internal and
external only), and 11 least cross-correlated ocean bio-
physical variables (marine only; see above for least cor-
related sets). Competing models were ranked based on
the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC), and we re-
ported the most parsimonious model for each of our
three datasets for each response variable. Multicolli-
nearity was evaluated in each of the final models using
the variance inflation factor (VIF) calculated with car
package [131] in R.
We applied path analyses with maximum Wishart like-
lihood (500 iterations) to test for the relative strength of
direct and indirect associations among abiotic/biotic pre-
dictors and microbiome diversity of our internal and ex-
ternal microbiome datasets. Path models were not built
for the marine dataset due to low predictive power of in-
cluded variables in the GLM model selection. We built
models including the most parsimonious set of explana-
tory variables predicting microbiome diversity according
to our GLM model selection procedures (see above).
Our four path models explaining number of OTUs and
Faith’s Phylogenetic Diversity for both internal and ex-
ternal microbiomes included all ecologically meaningful
associations among predictor variables. We performed a
fifth path model for Faith’s Phylogenetic Diversity of in-
ternal microbiomes, including direct and indirect effects
of immune system complexity in the analysis. We re-
ported whole model fit for our path models using the
root-mean square error of approximation (RMSEA).
When goodness of fit threshold for was not met
(RMSEA ≤0.1), we sequentially removed the weakest
paths until minimum RMSEA threshold was met for
each model. Analyses were performed using RAMONA
platform in SYSTAT 13.2 [132].
Analysis of beta diversity
We performed permutational multivariate analysis of
variance (PERMANOVA) to analyze microbial beta di-
versity and identify abiotic and biotic parameters influ-
encing
internal,
external,
and
marine
microbiomes.
Weighted and unweighted Unifrac distances were calcu-
lated in QIIME, and PERMANOVA models were imple-
mented in R with the adonis2() function in the vegan
package [133]. Independent models were run for the in-
ternal, external, and marine datasets. Predictor variables
included in beta diversity models were hypothesis-driven
and included all variables from the best alpha diversity
model for the given dataset as well as selected biotic fac-
tors. We visualized overarching patterns in microbial
beta diversity through principal coordinates analysis
using ggplot2 in R.
Woodhams et al. Genome Biology           (2020) 21:23 
Page 15 of 20
Additionally, we visualized the microbial abundance
of major bacterial phyla across host trophic diets. A
phylogenetic tree, OTU table, and taxonomy table
generated in QIIME were consolidated in R script
using the phyloseq and ape packages [129, 134]. The
function “dotTree” from the R package phytools [135]
was used to generate the phylogenetic tree at the
phylum level. Microbial abundance of each phylum
and the most abundant classes was calculated for each
trophic diet level.
Functional analysis with PICRUSt
Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruc-
tion of Unobserved States (PICRUSt) predicts metage-
nomic function using marker gene (such as 16S rRNA)
surveys [21]. GreenGenes 13-5 OTU IDs are required for
PICRUSt analyses; therefore, we clustered our internal
microbiome dataset sOTUs to Greengenes OTU IDs at
97% similarity in QIIME. A custom R script was used to
combine these GG IDs with abundance information to cre-
ate a PICRUSt-formatted OTU table. We then performed
the following steps: normalization by copy number, meta-
genome prediction, and consolidation of predictions into
KEGG pathways. Results were filtered to retain data with
an NSTI score of 0.06 or lower; 247 internal samples were
represented in the final analysis. Nearest Sequenced Taxon
Index (NSTI) is a confidence measure for PICRUSt predic-
tions. Beta diversity calculations (Bray-Curtis and Jaccard
dissimilarity) on PICRUSt functional predictions were per-
formed in QIIME and analyzed in R using the adonis2
function from vegan. The PICRUSt package is available at
http://picrust.github.io/picrust/.
Analyses on immune system complexity
We assessed the effect of immune system complexity on
microbial diversity by (a) comparing sOTU richness and
phylogenetic diversity between samples from hosts with
adaptive vs. innate only immune systems for both the in-
ternal and external dataset—pairwise comparisons were
implemented with Wilcoxon tests in R; (b) performing a
correlation test between microbial richness and immune
complexity using Kendall Tau correlation statistics in R;
and (c) running our comprehensive path model includ-
ing the immune complexity scale variable derived from
Flajnik [68].
Supplementary information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at https://doi.org/10.
1186/s13059-019-1908-8.
Additional file 1. Supplementary tables and figures [136–158].
Additional file 2. Full metadata file (15,790 samples), unfiltered.
Additional file 3. Filtered metadata file for internal microbiomes (741
samples).
Additional file 4. Filtered metadata file for external microbiomes (1193
samples).
Additional file 5. Filtered metadata file for marine external microbiomes
(266 samples).
Additional file 6. Deblur sOTU table (biom file) for the full dataset, not
rarefied.
Additional file 7. Deblur sOTU table (biom file) for the internal
microbiome (741 samples), rarefied to 1000 reads/sample.
Additional file 8. Deblur sOTU table (biom file) for the external
microbiomes (1193 samples), rarefied to 1000 reads/sample.
Additional file 9. Deblur sOTU table (biom file) for the marine external
microbiomes (266 samples), rarefied to 1000 reads/sample.
Additional file 10. RepSet fasta file for the full dataset.
Additional file 11. Fasta file to match OTU number with deblur
sequence ID.
Additional file 12. Phylogenetic tree file used for analyses on data
subsets.
Additional file 13. Review history.
Acknowledgements
This meta-analysis emerged from a graduate seminar at UMass Boston. We
thank all the students that participated in the course.
Review history
The review history is available as Additional file 13.
Peer review information
Andrew Cosgrove was the primary editor on this article and managed its
editorial process and peer review in collaboration with the rest of the
editorial team.
Authors’ contributions
DCW initiated and led the project and coordinated and assisted with the
data analysis. MCB trained the students in microbiome analysis, helped
coordinate the project, and assisted with the statistical analyses. DCW, MB,
JK, and MV helped to conceptualize the bioclimatic analysis of the
microbiome and PICRUSt datasets. The following authors were primarily
responsible for various analyses: BL alpha-diversity analyses; GB path analyses;
HD curated the mapping files, beta-diversity analyses; HB created the tax-
onomy plots; CL PICRUSt analyses; RH core analyses; DB GIS maps; GB, ATP,
and JK Wolbachia analyses; PJK and RW host taxonomy plots; MV, KM, PJK,
and NS data acquisition; and EK and KS microbial taxonomy plots. All authors
contributed to writing the manuscript, and read and approved the final
manuscript.
Authors’ information
Twitter handle: @ATPsciencegirl (Amanda G. Tokash-Peters).
Funding
MCB was supported by a David H Smith Conservation Fellowship. JK was
supported by Simons Foundation (429440, WTW). KS was supported by NSF
DBI #1759940. ATP was supported by the National Science Foundation grant
DGE 1249946, the Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship
(IGERT): Coasts and Communities – Natural and Human Systems in
Urbanizing Environments, and the University of Massachusetts Sanofi-
Genzyme Doctoral Fellowship.
Availability of data and materials
The datasets supporting the conclusions of this article are included within
the article and its Additional files (Additional file 2 through
Additional file 12). Additional file 1 provides descriptions of the data files
(metadata, biom, fasta, and tree files). Links to DOI numbers and data
repositories for each of the 51 datasets are indicated in Additional file 2. The
data were described in the Earth Microbiome Project [4], the Global
Amphibian Project [5], and additional recent studies referenced above.
Woodhams et al. Genome Biology           (2020) 21:23 
Page 16 of 20
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Author details
1Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts Boston, Boston, MA
02125, USA. 2Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, Roosevelt Ave. Tupper
Building – 401, 0843-03092 Panamá, Panama. 3Department of Biological
Sciences, The University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487, USA. 4School for
the Environment, University of Massachusetts, Boston, MA 02125, USA.
5Animal Health Department, New England Aquarium, Boston, MA 02110,
USA. 6Center of Excellence in Biodiversity and Natural Resource
Management, University of Rwanda, RN1, Butare, Rwanda. 7Zoological
Institute, Braunschweig University of Technology, Mendelssohnstr. 4, 38106
Braunschweig, Germany.
Received: 21 January 2019 Accepted: 2 December 2019
References
1.
McFall-Ngai M. Care for the community. Nature. 2007;445:153.
2.
Fierer N, Jackson RB. The diversity and biogeography of soil bacterial
communities. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006;103:626–31.
3.
Lozupone CA, Knight R. Global patterns in bacterial diversity. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 2007;104:11436–40.
4.
Thompson L, Sanders J, McDonald D, Amir A, Ladau J, Locey K, et al. A
communal catalogue reveals Earth’s multiscale microbial diversity. Nature.
2017;551:457.
5.
Kueneman JG, Bletz MC, Mckenzie VJ, Becker CG, Joseph MB, Abarca JG,
et al. Community richness of amphibian skin bacteria correlates with
bioclimate at the global scale. Nat Ecol Evol. 2019;3:381–9.
6.
Ley RE, Lozupone CA, Hamady M, Knight R, Gordon JI. Worlds within
worlds: evolution of the vertebrate gut microbiota. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2008;
6:776–88.
7.
Bahram M, Hildebrand F, Forslund SK, Anderson JL, Soudzilovskaia NA,
Bodegom PM, et al. Structure and function of the global topsoil
microbiome. Nature. 2018;560:233–7.
8.
Frey-Klett P, Burlinson P, Deveau A, Barret M, Tarkka M, Sarniguet A.
Bacterial-fungal interactions: hyphens between agricultural, clinical,
environmental, and food microbiologists. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev. 2011;75:
583–609.
9.
Kueneman JG, Woodhams DC, Van Treuren W, Archer HM, Knight R, McKenzie
VJ. Inhibitory bacteria reduce fungi on early life stages of endangered
Colorado boreal toads (Anaxyrus boreas). ISME J. 2016;10:934–44.
10.
Kearns PJ, Fischer S, Fernández-beaskoetxea S, Gabor CR, Zoological N, Si P.
Fight fungi with fungi: antifungal properties of the amphibian mycobiome.
Front Microbiol. 2017;8:1–12.
11.
García-Bayona L, Comstock LE. Bacterial antagonism in host-associated
microbial communities. Science. 2018;361:eaat2456.
12.
Bosch TCG, Guillemin K, McFall-Ngai M. Evolutionary “experiments” in
symbiosis: The study of model animals provides insights into the
mechanisms underlying the diversity of host–microbe interactions.
BioEssays. 2019;41:e1800256.
13.
Blaser M, Bork P, Fraser C, Knight R, Wang J. The microbiome explored:
recent insights and future challenges. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2013;11:213.
14.
McFall-Ngai M, Hadefield M, Bosch TCG, Carey HV, Domazet-Lošo T, Douglas
AE, et al. Animals in a bacterial world, a new imperative for the life sciences.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013;110:3229–36.
15.
Zaneveld JR, McMinds R, Thurber RV. Stress and stability: applying the Anna
Karenina principle to animal microbiomes. Nat Microbiol. 2017;2:17121.
16.
Petersen C, Round JL. Defining dysbiosis and its influence on host immunity
and disease. Cell Microbiol. 2014;16:1024–33.
17.
Song SJ, Woodhams DC, Martino C, Allaband C, Mu A. Engineering the
microbiome for animal health and conservation. Exp Biol Med. 2019;
244:494-504.
18.
Nelson TM, Apprill A, Mann J, Rogers TL, Brown MV. The marine mammal
microbiome: current knowledge and future directions. Microbiol Aust. 2015;
36:8–13.
19.
Blaser MJ. The theory of disappearing microbiota and the epidemics of
chronic diseases. Nat Rev Immunol. 2017;17:461–3.
20.
Wellington EMH, Berry A, Krsek M. Resolving functional diversity in relation
to microbial community structure in soil: exploiting genomics and stable
isotope probing. Curr Opin Microbiol. 2003;6:295–301.
21.
Langille MG, Zaneveld J, Caporaso JG, McDonald D, Knights D, Reyes JA,
et al. Predictive functional profiling of microbial communities using 16S
rRNA marker gene sequences. Nat Biotechnol. 2013;31:814–21.
22.
Legrand TPRA, Catalano SR, Wos-Oxley ML, Stephens F, Landos M, Bansemer
MS, et al. The inner workings of the outer surface: skin and gill microbiota
as indicators of changing gut health in yellowtail kingfish. Front Microbiol.
2018;8:2664.
23.
Glasl B, Herndl GJ, Frade PR. The microbiome of coral surface mucus has a
key role in mediating holobiont health and survival upon disturbance. ISME
J. 2016;10:2280.
24.
Stroup DF, Berlin JA, Morton SC, Olkin I, Williamson GD, Rennie D, et al.
Meta-analysis of observational studies in epidemiology: a proposal for
reporting. JAMA. 2000;283:2008–12.
25.
Dubilier N, McFall-Ngai M, Zhao L. Microbiology: create a global
microbiome effort. Nat News. 2015;526:631.
26.
Alivisatos AP, Blaser MJ, Brodie EL, Chun M, Dangl JL, Donohue TJ, et al. A
unified initiative to harness Earth’s microbiomes. Science. 2015;350:507–8.
27.
Amir A, McDonald D, Navas-Molina JA, Kopylova E, Morton JT, Zech Xu Z,
et al. Deblur rapidly resolves single-nucleotide community sequence
patterns. mSystems. 2017;2:e00191-16.
28.
Turnbaugh PJ, Ley RE, Hamady M, Fraser-Liggett CM, Knight R, Gordon JI.
The human microbiome project. Nature. 2007;449:804.
29.
Koren O, Knights D, Gonzalez A, Waldron L, Segata N, Knight R, et al. A
guide to enterotypes across the human body: meta-analysis of microbial
community structures in human microbiome datasets. PLoS Comput Biol.
2013;9:e1002863.
30.
Lozupone C, Stombaugh J, Gonzalez A, Ackermann G, Wendel D, Vázquez-
Baeza Y, et al. Meta-analyses of studies of the human microbiota. Genome
Res. 2013;23:1704-1714.
31.
Kriss M, Hazleton KZ, Nusbacher NM, Martin CG, Lozupone CA. Low diversity
gut microbiota dysbiosis: drivers, functional implications and recovery. Curr
Opin Microbiol. 2018;44:34–40.
32.
Sullam KE, Essinger SD, Lozupone CA, O’Connor MP, Rosen GL, Knight ROB,
et al. Environmental and ecological factors that shape the gut bacterial
communities of fish: a meta-analysis. Mol Ecol. 2012;21:3363–78.
33.
Amato KR, Sanders JG, Song SJ, Nute M, Metcalf JL, Thompson LR, et al.
Evolutionary trends in host physiology outweigh dietary niche in structuring
primate gut microbiomes. ISME J. 2018;13:576–87.
34.
Waite DW, Taylor MW. Characterizing the avian gut microbiota: membership,
driving influences, and potential function. Front Microbiol. 2014;5:223.
35.
Wegener Parfrey L, Walters WA, Knight R. Microbial eukaryotes in the
human microbiome: ecology, evolution, and future directions. Front
Microbiol. 2011;2:153.
36.
Nash AK, Auchtung TA, Wong MC, Smith DP, Gesell JR, Ross MC, et al. The
gut mycobiome of the Human Microbiome Project healthy cohort.
Microbiome. 2017;5:153.
37.
Wolf YI, Kazlauskas D, Iranzo J, Lucía-Sanz A, Kuhn JH, Krupovic M, et al.
Origins and evolution of the global RNA virome. MBio. 2018;9:e02329–18.
38.
Hug LA, Baker BJ, Anantharaman K, Brown CT, Probst AJ, Castelle CJ, et al. A
new view of the tree of life. Nat Microbiol. 2016;1:16048.
39.
Lagier J-C, Dubourg G, Million M, Cadoret F, Bilen M, Fenollar F, et al.
Culturing the human microbiota and culturomics. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2018;
16:540–50.
40.
Huys GRB, Raes J. Go with the flow or solitary confinement: a look inside
the single-cell toolbox for isolation of rare and uncultured microbes. Curr
Opin Microbiol. 2018;44:1–8.
41.
McKenzie VJ, Song SJ, Delsuc F, Prest TL, Oliverio AM, Korpita TM, et al. The
effects of captivity on the mammalian gut microbiome. Integr Comp Biol.
2017;57:690–704.
42.
Hird SM. Evolutionary biology needs wild microbiomes. Front Microbiol.
2017;8:1–10.
43.
Shade A, Dunn RR, Blowes SA, Keil P, Bohannan BJM, Herrmann M, et al.
Macroecology to unite all life, large and small. Trends Ecol Evol. 2018;33:731–44.
Woodhams et al. Genome Biology           (2020) 21:23 
Page 17 of 20
44.
Miller ET, Svanbäck R, Bohannan BJM. Microbiomes as metacommunities:
understanding host-associated microbes through metacommunity ecology.
Trends Ecol Evol. 2018;33:926–35.
45.
Loudon AH, Venkataraman A, Van Treuren W, Woodhams DC, Parfrey LW,
McKenzie VJ, et al. Vertebrate hosts as islands: dynamics of selection,
immigration, loss, persistence, and potential function of bacteria on
salamander skin. Front Microbiol. 2016;7:333.
46.
Prest TL, Kimball AK, Kueneman JG, McKenzie VJ. Host-associated
bacterial community succession during amphibian development. Mol
Ecol. 2018;27:1992–2006.
47.
Bello MGD, Knight R, Gilbert JA, Blaser MJ. Preserving microbial diversity.
Science. 2018;362:33–4.
48.
Klassen JL. Defining microbiome function. Nat Microbiol. 2018;3:864.
49.
Project THM. Structure, function and diversity of the healthy human
microbiome. Nature. 2012;486:207–14.
50.
Kohl KD, Weiss RB, Cox J, Dale C, Dearing MD. Gut microbes of mammalian
herbivores facilitate intake of plant toxins. Ecol Lett. 2014;17:1238–46.
51.
Muhlebach MS, Zorn BT, Esther CR, Hatch JE, Murray CP, Turkovic L, et al.
Initial acquisition and succession of the cystic fibrosis lung microbiome is
associated with disease progression in infants and preschool children. PLoS
Pathog. 2018;14:e1006798.
52.
Kohl KD, Miller AW, Marvin JE, Mackie R, Dearing MD. Herbivorous rodents
(Neotoma spp.) harbour abundant and active foregut microbiota. Environ
Microbiol. 2014;16:2869-2878.
53.
Stone BWG, Jackson CR. Biogeographic patterns between bacterial
phyllosphere communities of the Southern Magnolia (Magnolia grandiflora)
in a small forest. Microb Ecol. 2016;71:954–61.
54.
Wang W, Cao J, Yang F, Wang X, Zheng S, Sharshov K, et al. High-throughput
sequencing reveals the core gut microbiome of Bar-headed goose (Anser
indicus) in different wintering areas in Tibet. Microb Open. 2016;5:287–95.
55.
Sabino-Pinto J, Bletz MC, Islam MM, Shimizu N, Bhuju S, Geffers R, et al.
Composition of the cutaneous bacterial community in Japanese
amphibians: effects of captivity, host species, and body region. Microb Ecol.
2016;72:460-469.
56.
Amato KR, Martinez-Mota R, Righini N, Raguet-Schofield M, Corcione FP,
Marini E, et al. Phylogenetic and ecological factors impact the gut
microbiota of two Neotropical primate species. Oecologia. 2016;180:717–33.
57.
Bletz MC, Vences M, Sabino-Pinto J, Taguchi Y, Shimizu N, Nishikawa K, et al.
Cutaneous microbiota of the Japanese giant salamander (Andrias japonicus),
a representative of an ancient amphibian clade. Hydrobiologia. 2017;795:
153–167.
58.
Sankaranarayanan K, Ozga AT, Warinner C, Tito RY, Obregon-Tito AJ, Xu J,
et al. Gut microbiome diversity among Cheyenne and Arapaho individuals
from western Oklahoma. Curr Biol. 2015;25:3161–9.
59.
Hoffmann AA, Montgomery BL, Popovici J, Iturbe-Ormaetxe I, Johnson PH,
Muzzi F, et al. Successful establishment of Wolbachia in Aedes populations
to suppress dengue transmission. Nature. 2011;476:454.
60.
McMeniman CJ, Lane RV, Cass BN, Fong AWC, Sidhu M, Wang Y-F, et al.
Stable introduction of a life-shortening Wolbachia infection into the
mosquito Aedes aegypti. Science. 2009;323:141–4.
61.
Knight R, Vrbanac A, Taylor BC, Aksenov A, Callewaert C, Debelius J, et al.
Best practices for analysing microbiomes. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2018:410–22.
62.
Hammer TJ, Dickerson JC, Fierer N. Evidence-based recommendations on
storing and handling specimens for analyses of insect microbiota. PeerJ.
2015;3:e1190.
63.
Sender R, Fuchs S, Milo R. Revised estimates for the number of human and
bacteria cells in the body. PLoS Biol. 2016;14:1–14.
64.
Yatsunenko T, Rey FE, Manary MJ, Trehan I, Dominguez-bello MG, Contreras
M, et al. Human gut microbiome viewed across age and geography. Nature.
2012;486.
65.
Joe JTX, Chiou PP, Kuo C-Y, Lin JHJ, Wu J-L, Lu M-W. The microbiota profile
and transcriptome analysis of immune response during metamorphosis
stages in orange spotted grouper (Epinephelus coioides). Fish Shellfish
Immunol. 2019;90:141–149.
66.
Yan Q, Li J, Yu Y, Wang J, He Z, Van Nostrand JD, et al. Environmental
filtering decreases with fish development for the assembly of gut
microbiota. Environ Microbiol. 2016;18:4739–54.
67.
Egerton S, Culloty S, Whooley J, Stanton C, Ross RP. The gut microbiota of
marine fish. Front. Microbiol. 2018;9:873.
68.
Flajnik MF. A cold-blooded view of adaptive immunity. Nat Rev Immunol.
2018;7:438–53.
69.
Nottingham AT, Fierer N, Turner BL, Whitaker J, Ostle NJ, McNamara NP, et al.
Microbes follow Humboldt: temperature drives plant and soil microbial diversity
patterns from the Amazon to the Andes. Bull Ecol Soc Am. 2019;100:1–4.
70.
Chiarello M, Auguet J-C, Bettarel Y, Bouvier C, Claverie T, Graham NAJ, et al.
Skin microbiome of coral reef fish is highly variable and driven by host
phylogeny and diet. Microbiome. 2018;6:147.
71.
Lyra ML, Bletz MC, Haddad CFB, Vences M. The intestinal microbiota of
tadpoles differs from those of syntopic aquatic invertebrates. Microb Ecol.
2018;76:121–4.
72.
Colston TJ. Gut microbiome transmission in lizards. Mol Ecol. 2017;26:972–4.
73.
Steffan SA, Chikaraishi Y, Currie CR, Horn H, Gaines-Day HR, Pauli JN, et al.
Microbes are trophic analogs of animals. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015;112:
15119–24.
74.
Kohl KD, Brun A, Magallanes M, Brinkerhoff J, Laspiur A, Acosta JC,
et al. Gut microbial ecology of lizards: insights into diversity in the wild,
effects of captivity, variation across gut regions and transmission. Mol
Ecol. 2017;26:1175–89.
75.
Liu H, Guo X, Gooneratne R, Lai R, Zeng C, Zhan F, et al. The gut
microbiome and degradation enzyme activity of wild freshwater fishes
influenced by their trophic levels. Sci Rep. 2016;6:24340.
76.
Grond K, Sandercock BK, Jumpponen A, Zeglin LH. The avian gut
microbiota: community, physiology and function in wild birds. J Avian Biol.
2018;49:e01788.
77.
Michel AJ, Ward LM, Goffredi SK, Dawson KS, Baldassarre DT, Brenner A,
et al. The gut of the finch: uniqueness of the gut microbiome of the
Galápagos vampire finch. Microbiome. 2018;6:167.
78.
Ley RE, Hamady M, Lozupone C, Turnbaugh PJ, Ramey RR, Bircher JS, et al.
Evolution of mammals and their gut microbes. Science. 2008;320:1647–51.
79.
Terborgh JW. Toward a trophic theory of species diversity. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 2015;112:11415–22.
80.
Koltz AM, Classen AT, Wright JP. Warming reverses top-down effects of
predators on belowground ecosystem function in Arctic tundra. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2018;115:E7541–9.
81.
Colston TJ, Jackson CR. Microbiome evolution along divergent branches of the
vertebrate tree of life: what’s known and unknown. Mol Ecol. 2016;25:3776–800.
82.
Davenport ER, Sanders JG, Song SJ, Amato KR, Clark AG, Knight R. The
human microbiome in evolution. BMC Biol. 2017;15:127.
83.
Pascoe EL, Hauffe HC, Marchesi JR, Perkins SE. Network analysis of gut
microbiota literature: an overview of the research landscape in non-human
animal studies. ISME J. 2017;11:2644–51.
84.
Adair KL, Douglas AE. Making a microbiome: the many determinants of
host-associated microbial community composition. Curr Opin Microbiol.
2017;35:23–9.
85.
Caporaso JG, Lauber CL, Walters WA, Berg-lyons D, Lozupone CA,
Turnbaugh PJ, et al. Global patterns of 16S rRNA diversity at a depth
of millions of sequences per sample. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011;
108:4516–22.
86.
Amato KR, Metcalf JL, Song SJ, Hale VL, Clayton J, Ackermann G, et al. Using
the gut microbiota as a novel tool for examining colobine primate GI
health. Glob Ecol Conserv. 2016;7:225–37.
87.
Hale VL, Tan CL, Knight R, Amato KR. Effect of preservation method on
spider monkey (Ateles geoffroyi) fecal microbiota over 8 weeks. J Microbiol
Methods. 2015;113:16–26.
88.
Smith CCR, Snowberg LK, Caporaso JG, Knight R, Bolnick DI. Dietary input of
microbes and host genetic variation shape among-population differences in
stickleback gut microbiota. ISME J. 2015;9:2515.
89.
Wagner MR, Lundberg DS, Tijana G, Tringe SG, Dangl JL, Mitchell-Olds T.
Host genotype and age shape the leaf and root microbiomes of a wild
perennial plant. Nat Commun. 2016;7:12151.
90.
Bates KA, Clare FC, O’Hanlon S, Bosch J, Brookes L, Hopkins K, et al.
Amphibian chytridiomycosis outbreak dynamics are linked with host skin
bacterial community structure. Nat Commun. 2018;9:693.
91.
Lewis ZT, Sidamonidze K, Tsaturyan V, Tsereteli D, Khachidze N, Pepoyan A,
et al. The fecal microbial community of breast-fed infants from Armenia and
Georgia. Sci Rep. 2017;7:40932.
92.
Hakim JA, Koo H, Kumar R, Lefkowitz EJ, Morrow CD, Powell ML, et al. The
gut microbiome of the sea urchin, Lytechinus variegatus, from its natural
habitat demonstrates selective attributes of microbial taxa and predictive
metabolic profiles. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2016;92:146.
93.
Moitinho-Silva L, Nielsen S, Amir A, Gonzalez A, Ackermann GL, Cerrano C,
et al. The sponge microbiome project. Gigascience. 2017;6:gix077.
Woodhams et al. Genome Biology           (2020) 21:23 
Page 18 of 20
94.
Sanders JG, Łukasik P, Frederickson ME, Russell JA, Koga R, Knight R, et al.
Dramatic differences in gut bacterial densities correlate with diet and
habitat in rainforest ants. Integr Comp Biol. 2017;57:705–22.
95.
Hammer TJ, Fierer N, Hardwick B, Simojoki A, Slade E, Taponen J, et al.
Treating cattle with antibiotics affects greenhouse gas emissions, and
microbiota in dung and dung beetles. Proc R Soc B Biol Sci. 2016;283:
20160150.
96.
Raulo A, Ruokolainen L, Lane A, Amato K, Knight R, Leigh S, et al. Social behaviour
and gut microbiota in red-bellied lemurs (Eulemur rubriventer): in search of the role
of immunity in the evolution of sociality. J Anim Ecol. 2018;87:388–99.
97.
Marzinelli EM, Campbell AH, Zozaya Valdes E, Vergés A, Nielsen S, Wernberg
T, et al. Continental-scale variation in seaweed host-associated bacterial
communities is a function of host condition, not geography. Environ
Microbiol. 2015;17:4078–88.
98.
Delsuc F, Metcalf JL, Wegener Parfrey L, Song SJ, González A, Knight R.
Convergence of gut microbiomes in myrmecophagous mammals. Mol Ecol.
2014;23:1301–17.
99.
Yuan ML, Dean SH, Longo AV, Rothermel BB, Tuberville TD, Zamudio KR.
Kinship, inbreeding and fine-scale spatial structure influence gut microbiota
in a hindgut-fermenting tortoise. Mol Ecol. 2015;24:2521–36.
100. Toju H, Vannette RL, Gauthier ML, Dhami MK, Fukami T. Priority effects can
persist across floral generations in nectar microbial metacommunities.
Oikos. 2018;127:345–52.
101. Van Treuren W, Ponnusamy L, Brinkerhoff RJ, Gonzalez A, Parobek CM,
Juliano JJ, et al. Variation in the microbiota of Ixodes ticks with regard to
geography, species, and sex. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2015;81:6200–9.
102. Caporaso JG, Lauber CL, Costello EK, Berg-Lyons D, Gonzalez A, Stombaugh J,
et al. Moving pictures of the human microbiome. Genome Biol. 2011;12:R50.
103. Koehler AV, Haydon SR, Jex AR, Gasser RB. Cryptosporidium and Giardia taxa
in faecal samples from animals in catchments supplying the city of
Melbourne with drinking water (2011 to 2015). Parasit Vectors. 2016;9:315.
104. Nolan MJ, Jex AR, Koehler AV, Haydon SR, Stevens MA, Gasser RB.
Molecular-based investigation of Cryptosporidium and Giardia from animals
in water catchments in southeastern Australia. Water Res. 2013;47:1726–40.
105. Zeng Y, Zeng D, Ni X, Zhu H, Jian P, Zhou Y, et al. Microbial community
compositions in the gastrointestinal tract of Chinese Mongolian sheep
using Illumina MiSeq sequencing revealed high microbial diversity. AMB
Express. 2017;7:75.
106. Vences M, Lyra MML, Kueneman JG, Bletz MC, Archer HM, Canitz J, et al. Gut
bacterial communites across tadpole ecomorphs in two diverse tropical
anuran faunas. Sci Nat. 2016;103:25.
107. Piombino P, Genovese A, Esposito S, Moio L, Cutolo PP, Chambery A, et al.
Saliva from obese individuals suppresses the release of aroma compounds
from wine. PLoS One. 2014;9:e85611.
108. Apprill A, Robbins J, Eren AM, Pack AA, Reveillaud J, Mattila D, et al.
Humpback whale populations share a core skin bacterial community:
towards a health index for marine mammals? PLoS One. 2014;9:e90785.
109. Price JT, Paladino FV, Lamont MM, Witherington BE, Bates ST, Soule T.
Characterization of the juvenile green turtle (Chelonia mydas) microbiome
throughout an ontogenetic shift from pelagic to neritic habitats. PLoS One.
2017;12:e0177642.
110. Whitaker MRL, Salzman S, Sanders J, Kaltenpoth M, Pierce NE. Microbial
communities of lycaenid butterflies do not correlate with larval diet. Front
Microbiol. 2016;7:1920.
111. Novakova E, Woodhams DC, Rodríguez-Ruano SM, Brucker RM, Leff JW,
Maharaj A, et al. Mosquito microbiome dynamics, a background for
prevalence and seasonality of West Nile virus. Front Microbiol. 2017;8:526.
112. Jiang H-Y, Ma J-E, Li J, Zhang X-J, Li L-M, He N, et al. Diets alter the gut
microbiome of crocodile lizards. Front Microbiol. 2017;8:2073.
113. Parris DJ, Brooker RM, Morgan MA, Dixson DL, Stewart FJ. Whole gut
microbiome composition of damselfish and cardinalfish before and after
reef settlement. PeerJ. 2016;4:e2412.
114. Pfister CA, Gilbert JA, Gibbons SM. The role of macrobiota in structuring
microbial communities along rocky shores. PeerJ. 2014;2:e631.
115. Sanchez E, Bletz MC, Dunsch L, Bhuju S, Geffers R, Jarek M, et al.
Cutaneous bacterial communities of a poisonous salamander: a
perspective from life stages, body parts and environmental conditions.
Microb Ecol. 2016;73:455–65.
116. Kueneman JG, Parfrey LW, Woodhams DC, Archer HM, Knight R, McKenzie
VJ. The amphibian skin-associated microbiome across species, space and life
history stages. Mol Ecol. 2014;23:1238–50.
117. Sickel W, Grafe TU, Meuche I, Steffan-Dewenter I, Keller A. Bacterial diversity
and community structure in two Bornean Nepenthes species with
differences in nitrogen acquisition strategies. Microb Ecol. 2016;71:938–53.
118. Loudon AH, Woodhams DC, Parfrey LW, Archer HM, Knight R, McKenzie V,
et al. Microbial community dynamics and effect of environmental microbial
reservoirs on red-backed salamanders (Plethodon cinereus). ISME J. 2014;8:
830–40.
119. Kohl KD, Varner J, Wilkening JL, Dearing MD. Gut microbial communities of
American pikas (Ochotona princeps): evidence for phylosymbiosis and
adaptations to novel diets. J Anim Ecol. 2018;87:323–30.
120. Menke S, Meier M, Melzheimer J, Mfune JKE, Heinrich S, Thalwitzer S, et al.
Oligotyping reveals differences between gut microbiomes of free-ranging
sympatric Namibian carnivores (Acinonyx jubatus, Canis mesomelas) on a
bacterial species-like level. Front Microbiol. 2014;5:526.
121. Hammer TJ, Janzen DH, Hallwachs W, Jaffe SP, Fierer N. Caterpillars lack a
resident gut microbiome. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017;114:9641–6.
122. Wang Q, Garrity GM, Tiedje JM, Cole JR. Naive Bayesian classifier for rapid
assignment of rRNA sequences into the new bacterial taxonomy. Appl
Environ Microbiol. 2007;73:5261–7.
123. Mcdonald D, Price MN, Goodrich J, Nawrocki E, DeSantis TZ, Probst A,
et al. An improved Greengenes taxonomy with explicit ranks for
ecological and evolutionary analyses of bacteria and archaea. ISME J.
2012;6:610–8.
124. Price MN, Dehal PS, Arkin AP. FastTree 2 - approximately maximum-
likelihood trees for large alignments. PLoS One. 2010;5:e9490.
125. Fick SE, Hijmans RJ. WorldClim 2: new 1-km spatial resolution climate
surfaces for global land areas. Int J Climatol. 2017;37:4302–15.
126. Sbrocco EJ, Barber PH. MARSPEC: ocean climate layers for marine spatial
ecology: ecological archives E094-086. Ecology. 2013;94:979.
127. Kuhn M. Caret: classification and regression training. Astrophys Source Code
Libr. 2015.
128. Hedges SB, Dudley J, Kumar S. TimeTree: a public knowledge-base of
divergence times among organisms. Bioinformatics. 2006;22:2971–2.
129. Paradis E, Schliep K. Ape 5.0: an environment for modern phylogenetics and
evolutionary analyses in R. Bioinformatics. 2019;35:526–8.
130. Jombart T, Dray S. Adephylo: exploratory analyses for the phylogenetic
comparative method. Bioinformatics. 2008;26:1907–1909.
131. Fox J, Weisberg S. An {R} companion to applied regression. 2nd ed. SAGE
Publications, Inc., Thousand Oaks; 2011.
132. SYSTAT. Systat Software, San Jose; 2002.
133. Oksanen J, Blanchet FG, Friendly M, Kindt R, Legendre P, McGlinn D, et al.
Vegan: community ecology package. R package verion 2; 2017. p. 4–2.
134. McMurdie PJ, Holmes S. Phyloseq: an R package for reproducible
interactive analysis and graphics of microbiome census data. PLoS One.
2013;8:e61217.
135. Revell LJ. Phytools: an R package for phylogenetic comparative biology (and
other things). Methods Ecol Evol. 2012;3:217–23.
136. Zug R, Hammerstein P. Still a host of hosts for Wolbachia: analysis of recent
data suggests that 40% of terrestrial arthropod species are infected. PLoS
One. 2012;7:e38544.
137. Sazama EJ, Ouellette SP, Wesner JS. Bacterial endosymbionts are common
among, but not necessarily within, insect species. Environ Entomol. 2019;48:
127–33.
138. Sazama EJ, Bosch MJ, Shouldis CS, Ouellette SP, Wesner JS. Incidence of
Wolbachia in aquatic insects. Ecol Evol. 2017;7:1165–9.
139. De Oliveira CD, Gonçalves D da S, Baton LA, PHF S, Carvalho FD, Moreira LA.
Broader prevalence of Wolbachia in insects including potential human
disease vectors. Bull Entomol Res. 2015;105:305–15.
140. Weinert LA, Araujo-Jnr EV, Ahmed MZ, Welch JJ. The incidence of bacterial
endosymbionts in terrestrial arthropods. Proc R Soc B. 2015;282:20150249.
141. Zug R, Hammerstein P. Bad guys turned nice? A critical assessment of
Wolbachia mutualisms in arthropod hosts. Biol Rev. 2015;90:89–111.
142. Terradas G, Allen SL, Chenoweth SF, McGraw EA. Family level variation in
Wolbachia-mediated dengue virus blocking in Aedes aegypti. Parasit Vectors.
2017;10:622.
143. Zhang Y, Yang K, Zhu Y, Hong X. Symbiont-conferred reproduction and fitness
benefits can favour their host occurrence. Ecol Evol. 2018;8:1626–33.
144. Carrington LB, Tran BCN, Le NTH, Luong TTH, Nguyen TT, Nguyen PT, et al.
Field-and clinically derived estimates of Wolbachia-mediated blocking of
dengue virus transmission potential in Aedes aegypti mosquitoes. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2018;115:361–6.
Woodhams et al. Genome Biology           (2020) 21:23 
Page 19 of 20
145. O’Neill SL, Ryan PA, Turley AP, Wilson G, Retzki K, Iturbe-Ormaetxe I, et al. Scaled
deployment of Wolbachia to protect the community from dengue and other Aedes
transmitted arboviruses. Gates Open Res. 2018;2:36.
146. Hughes GL, Vega-Rodriguez J, Xue P, Rasgon JL. Wolbachia strain wAlbB
enhances infection by the rodent malaria parasite Plasmodium berghei in
Anopheles gambiae mosquitoes. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2012;78:1491–5.
147. Rancès E, Yixin HY, Woolfit M, McGraw EA, O’Neill SL. The relative
importance of innate immune priming in Wolbachia-mediated dengue
interference. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8:e1002548.
148. Bian G, Joshi D, Dong Y, Lu P, Zhou G, Pan X, et al. Wolbachia invades
Anopheles stephensi populations and induces refractoriness to Plasmodium
infection. Science. 2013;340:748–51.
149. Zélé F, Nicot A, Berthomieu A, Weill M, Duron O, Rivero A. Wolbachia
increases susceptibility to Plasmodium infection in a natural system. Proc R
Soc B. 2014;281:20132837.
150. Dodson BL, Andrews ES, Turell MJ, Rasgon JL. Wolbachia effects on Rift
Valley fever virus infection in Culex tarsalis mosquitoes. PLoS Negl Trop Dis.
2017;11:e0006050.
151. Diouf M, Miambi E, Mora P, Frechault S, Robert A, Rouland-Lefèvre C, et al.
Variations in the relative abundance of Wolbachia in the gut of Nasutitermes
arborum across life stages and castes. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2018;365:46.
152. Walker T, Johnson PH, Moreira LA, Iturbe-Ormaetxe I, Frentiu FD,
McMeniman CJ, et al. The wMel Wolbachia strain blocks dengue and
invades caged Aedes aegypti populations. Nature. 2011;476:450.
153. Moreira LA, Iturbe-Ormaetxe I, Jeffery JA, Lu G, Pyke AT, Hedges LM, et al. A
Wolbachia symbiont in Aedes aegypti limits infection with dengue,
Chikungunya, and Plasmodium. Cell. 2009;139:1268–78.
154. Hurst GDD, Johnson AP, JHG v S, Fuyama Y. Male-killing Wolbachia in
Drosophila: a temperature-sensitive trait with a threshold bacterial density.
Genetics. 2000;156:699–709.
155. Reynolds KT, Thomson LJ, Hoffmann AA. The effects of host age, host
nuclear background and temperature on phenotypic effects of the
virulent Wolbachia strain popcorn in Drosophila melanogaster. Genetics.
2003;164:1027–34.
156. Arnold PA, Levin SC, Stevanovic AL, Johnson KN. Drosophila melanogaster
infected with Wolbachia strain wMelCS prefer cooler temperatures. Ecol
Entomol. 2019;44:287–90.
157. Pascar J, Chandler CH. A bioinformatics approach to identifying Wolbachia
infections in arthropods. PeerJ. 2018;6:e5486.
158. Jeffries CL, Tantely LM, Raharimalala FN, Hurn E, Boyer S, Walker T. Diverse
novel resident Wolbachia strains in Culicine mosquitoes from Madagascar.
Sci Rep. 2018;8:17456.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Woodhams et al. Genome Biology           (2020) 21:23 
Page 20 of 20
