Resource
Interactome Rewiring Following Pharmacological
Targeting of BET Bromodomains
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
d Treatment with JQ1 induces an extensive BET proteins
interactome rewiring
d Structural and biophysical studies expand the target space
for BET bromodomains
d Two distinct short linear motifs mediate BET ET domain
interactions
d BRD3 negatively regulates proliferation through Pol I and II
mechanisms
Authors
Jean-Philippe Lambert, Sarah Picaud,
Takao Fujisawa, ..., Michael D. Wilson,
Panagis Filippakopoulos,
Anne-Claude Gingras
Correspondence
panagis.ﬁlippakopoulos@sgc.ox.ac.uk
(P.F.),
gingras@lunenfeld.ca (A.-C.G.)
In Brief
Lambert, Picaud, et al. report that
pharmacological bromodomain inhibition
rewires the interactome of the Bromo and
Extra-Terminal (BET) proteins, resulting in
loss (e.g., histones), maintenance, or gain
of interactions. They reveal new binding
modalities and an unsuspected negative
role for BRD3 in proliferation.
Lambert et al., 2019, Molecular Cell 73, 621–638
February 7, 2019 ª 2018 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2018.11.006
Molecular Cell
Resource
Interactome Rewiring Following
Pharmacological Targeting of BET Bromodomains
Jean-Philippe Lambert,1,12,13,14 Sarah Picaud,2,12 Takao Fujisawa,3 Huayun Hou,4,5 Pavel Savitsky,2
Liis Uusk€ula-Reimand,5,6 Gagan D. Gupta,1,15 Hala Abdouni,1 Zhen-Yuan Lin,1 Monika Tucholska,1 James D.R. Knight,1
Beatriz Gonzalez-Badillo,1 Nicole St-Denis,1 Joseph A. Newman,2 Manuel Stucki,7 Laurence Pelletier,1,4
Nuno Bandeira,8,9,10 Michael D. Wilson,4,5,11 Panagis Filippakopoulos,2,3,16,* and Anne-Claude Gingras1,4,*
1Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute at Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON M5G 1X5, Canada
2Structural Genomics Consortium, Nufﬁeld Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK
3Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Nufﬁeld Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK
4Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
5Genetics and Genome Biology Program, SickKids Research Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada
6Department of Gene Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn, Estonia
7Department of Gynecology, University of Zurich, Wagistrasse 14, 8952 Schlieren, Switzerland
8Center for Computational Mass Spectrometry, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
9Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
10Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
11Heart & Stroke Richard Lewar Centre of Excellence in Cardiovascular Research, Toronto, ON, Canada
12These authors contributed equally
13Present address: Department of Molecular Medicine and Cancer Research Centre, Universite´ Laval, Que´ bec, QC, Canada
14Present address: Centre de recherche du CHU de Que´ bec - Universite´ Laval, Que´ bec, QC G1V 4G2, Canada
15Present address: Department of Chemistry and Biology, Ryerson University, Toronto, ON M5B 2K3, Canada
16Lead Contact
*Correspondence: panagis.ﬁlippakopoulos@sgc.ox.ac.uk (P.F.), gingras@lunenfeld.ca (A.-C.G.)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2018.11.006
SUMMARY
Targeting bromodomains (BRDs) of the bromo-and-
extra-terminal (BET) family offers opportunities for
therapeutic intervention in cancer and other diseases.
Here, we proﬁle the interactomes of BRD2, BRD3,
BRD4, and BRDT following treatment with the pan-
BET BRD inhibitor JQ1, revealing broad rewiring of
the interaction landscape, with three distinct classes
of behavior for the 603 unique interactors identiﬁed.
A group of proteins associate in a JQ1-sensitive
manner with BET BRDs through canonical and new
binding modes, while two classes of extra-terminal
(ET)-domain binding motifs mediate acetylation-inde-
pendent interactions. Last, we identify an unexpected
increase in several interactions following JQ1 treat-
ment that deﬁne negative functions for BRD3 in the
regulation of rRNA synthesis and potentially RNAPII-
dependent gene expression that result in decreased
cell proliferation. Together, our data highlight the
contributions of BET protein modules to their interac-
tomes allowing for a better understanding of pharma-
cological rewiring in response to JQ1.
INTRODUCTION
Eukaryotic transcription is a tightly controlled process that
depends on the formation of protein complexes regulated by
post-translational modiﬁcations (Bernstein et al., 2007). Bromo
and extra-terminal (BET) proteins provide a recruitment platform
initiated by the recognition of acetylated lysines (Kac) by their
tandem bromodomains (BRD, Dhalluin et al., 1999; Jacobson
et al., 2000; Owen et al., 2000). BETs, like all of the 42 human
BRD-containing proteins, contain additional interaction domains
that recruit other proteins to the acetylated protein target, form-
ing complex assemblies and contributing to processes such as
chromatin remodeling and transcription (reviewed in Fujisawa
and Filippakopoulos, 2017).
The BET sub-family comprises four proteins in humans
(BRD2, BRD3, BRD4, and the testis-speciﬁc BRDT) that harbor
at their amino-termini two BRD modules with distinct speciﬁcity
for Kac on histones and on a growing list of non-histone targets,
reviewed in Fujisawa and Filippakopoulos, 2017), followed by
an extra-terminal (ET) domain that mediates protein-protein in-
teractions (Rahman et al., 2011; Figure 1A). BRD4 and BRDT
also contain a C-terminal motif (CTM) that facilitates the recruit-
ment of transcriptional regulators, including the positive tran-
scription elongation factor b (P-TEFb; Figure 1B). BETs, and
in particular BRD4, have been implicated in human disease,
especially cancer. Translocations of BRD4 (and more rarely
BRD3) to the NUTM1 (NUT midline carcinoma family member 1)
gene cause a rare but aggressive form of squamous cell
carcinoma (French et al., 2004). Furthermore, BRD4 levels are
upregulated in a variety of tumors, leading to aberrant expres-
sion of growth-promoting genes, including the MYC oncogene
(Delmore et al., 2011; Mertz et al., 2011; Zuber et al., 2011)
and other transcription factors such as ERG, c-Myb, E2F1,
and nuclear factor kB (NF-kB) (reviewed in Fujisawa and Fili-
ppakopoulos, 2017).
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638, February 7, 2019 ª 2018 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc.
621
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
A
D
B
C
Figure 1. BET Proteins Are Molecular Scaffolds Interacting with Distinct Proteins
(A) Modular organization of BET proteins (domain boundaries in amino acids).
(B) BETs scaffold transcriptional regulators to acetylated histones. Inset: JQ1 competes with Kac-containing peptides for BRD association.
(C) Overview of experimental setup used to quantify the BET interaction network upon JQ1 treatment.
(D) Heatmap of BET high-conﬁdence interaction partners identiﬁed by AP-MS in the JQ1 time course.
See also Figure S1 and Tables S1 and S2.
622
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638, February 7, 2019
The importance of BET proteins in cancer, together with the
recognition that BRD-Kac interactions are druggable, has
made them attractive targets for pharmaceutical intervention
(Filippakopoulos et al., 2010; Nicodeme et al., 2010). Direct tar-
geting of BET-BRDs by small-molecule inhibitors such as the
high-afﬁnity and pan-BET speciﬁcity thienodiazepine (+)-JQ1
(hereafter referred to as JQ1) enables their displacement from
Kac (Figure 1B). JQ1 displays anticancer activity in cell-culture
models, patient-derived xenograft models of NUT midline carci-
noma, and in several Myc-driven cancers (reviewed in Bradner
et al., 2017). More than 20 clinical trials have been recently initi-
ated to investigate the efﬁcacy of BET-BRD inhibitors in an array
of cancers (clinicaltrials.gov), with overall responses being
limited and short lived. Yet, preclinical data suggest that, in
combination with existing therapies, BET-BRD inhibitors can
potentiate the effects of cell cycle, immune checkpoint, and
DNA damage repair inhibitors (Doroshow et al., 2017). An
improved understanding of BET protein biochemistry is essential
to facilitate the successful progression of BET-BRD inhibitors
into the clinic.
Here, we establish the interactome of each BET protein,
revealing a rich network of interactions that are modulated
following treatment with JQ1. By analyzing the quantitative
behavior of 603 interactors, we deﬁne three classes of
proteins: those for which interaction decreases following JQ1
treatment, those whose association remains relatively un-
changed, and those that are unexpectedly increased following
BRD inhibition. Multiple decreased interactors harbor se-
quences that can directly associate with BET-BRDs in canonical
or new BRD-mediated structural binding modes, and we pro-
pose that the tandem BRDs present in each BET protein may
be capable of simultaneously recruiting both a histone and a sec-
ond interactor. Consistent with previous reports, we deﬁne two
distinct sequence motifs that bind to the BET ET domain in a
Kac-independent manner. Last, by examining gained interac-
tors, we identify an unsuspected function for BRD3 in ribosome
biogenesis, and a negative role in cell proliferation that is sup-
ported by mining genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 datasets. Our
ﬁndings suggest that pan-BET inhibitors may have the unin-
tended consequence of inhibiting the growth repressive func-
tions of BRD3, in parallel to inhibiting the desired BRD4 positive
functions. Taken together, our systematic proteomics, biophys-
ical, structural, and cell biological studies provide a framework to
better understand BET biochemistry and promote the rational
development of new inhibitors.
RESULTS
Interactome Proﬁling Reveals Shared and Distinct BET
Protein Interaction Partners
To establish an interaction network for the BETs, we performed
afﬁnity puriﬁcation coupled with mass spectrometry (AP-MS) on
33FLAG-tagged
BET
proteins
using
optimized
protocols
enabling recovery of interactors for both DNA-bound and un-
bound proteins (Lambert et al., 2014). Samples analyzed by
data-independent acquisition MS across two biological repli-
cates were scored against negative controls with Signiﬁcance
Analysis of INTeractome (SAINT, Teo et al., 2014). We identiﬁed
650 high-conﬁdence BET interactions (FDR %1% and R2 of
0.93; Table S2A) involving 357 unique preys, 329 (92%) of
which have not been previously reported in the BioGRID repos-
itory (Figure S1A), though 106 of the interactors were detected
with at least one BET bait in a previous study (Dawson et al.,
2011; Table S2B). The 357 interactors were highly enriched for
expected Gene Ontology terms ‘‘nuclear lumen’’ (Cellular
Component), ‘‘nucleic acid binding’’ (Molecular Function), and
for the ‘‘gene expression’’ REACTOME pathway (Table S2C).
Our proteomic screens revealed multiple interactions for each
BET protein (Figure S1A), with 26 interactors shared across all
BETs and 177 detected with a single BET bait (Figure S1B).
Several interactors shared across all BETs (e.g., CHD8,
PWWP2B, and WHSC1L1) were previously identiﬁed only as
BRD4 interactors (Rahman et al., 2011; Shen et al., 2015), high-
lighting the importance of performing a systematic family-wide
assessment. BET proteins formed an interconnected interaction
network, notably through shared interactions with histones that
included association with other BRD-containing proteins, sug-
gesting an intricate physical interplay between Kac readers on
chromatin, and reinforcing the scaffolding roles of BET proteins
in regulating transcriptional programs (Table S2D).
Consistent with the existence of a CTM (Figure 1A), BRDT and
BRD4 associated with P-TEFb, as previously shown (Gaucher
et al., 2012; Jang et al., 2005), and with the negative elongation
factor (NELF) complex, as was suggested for BRD4 (Patel et al.,
2013). Components of negative transcriptional regulators such
as the nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase (NuRD) com-
plex preferentially associated with BRD3 and BRD4 while the
RNAPII subunits POLR2A and POLR2L, as well as most Medi-
ator subunits, were only identiﬁed as high-conﬁdence partners
for BRD4 (Table S2D). Our survey therefore revealed rich interac-
tomes for each BET protein linking them to both activating and
repressive functions.
JQ1 Rewires the BET Protein Interaction Landscape
To evaluate the impact of BRD inhibition on the BET interaction
landscape, we performed AP-MS on each BET after treating
cells with 500 nM JQ1 for 10, 60, or 240 min (untreated samples,
t = 0, are described above). We identiﬁed 2,278 protein-protein
interactions (1,068 of which are non-redundant, including
1,034 not previously reported in BioGRID) involving 603 unique
signiﬁcant interaction partners (FDR %1%) across all conditions
tested. Treatment with JQ1 elicited rapid (i.e., within 10 min)
changes of the interactions established by each BET, which
were sustained, and in some cases enhanced, at 60 and
240 min (Figures 1C and 1D).
Collapsing the transcription-related BET interactors to 12
functional groups or protein complexes (encompassing 149
unique interactors; Tables S2E and S2F) enabled us to capture
a network view of the transcriptional interactome changes
caused by 1 hr of JQ1 treatment (Figure 2A). While association
with histones (group I) was pronounced in untreated cells, JQ1
treatment resulted in an expected and dramatic decrease in re-
covery, validating our experimental system (Figures 2A–2C and
S1C; data in Table S2A). JQ1 treatment also led to a marked
reduction in the recovery of histone chaperones (group II),
including the FACT and CAF1 complexes, as well as DAXX and
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638, February 7, 2019
623
A
B
C
Figure 2. Pharmacological BRD Inhibition Modulates the BET Interactome
(A) Network view of selected protein complexes or families (groups I–XII; names in B, details in Table S2D) associated with BETs. Node size displays the relative
abundance in cells untreated or treated with JQ1 for 1 hr.
(B) Relative spectral count contributions of individual BET proteins to selected groups or complexes.
(C) Dot plots of selected interaction partners associated with individual BETs after JQ1 treatment.
See also Figure S1 and Tables S1 and S2.
624
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638, February 7, 2019
DEK. Recovery of the switch/sucrose non-fermentable (SWI/
SNF) nucleosome remodeling complex components (group III)
with all BETs was also strongly reduced by JQ1 treatment (Fig-
ures 2A, 2B, S1C, and S1D). Altogether, JQ1 treatment for 1 hr
resulted in a global decrease (log2 fold change [LFC] %2) of
367 interactions (Figures 1D and 2A; Table S2E). Some func-
tional groups displayed sustained interactions (LFC within ±2;
262 interactions) with BETs following JQ1 treatment (Figures
2A and 2B), including CHD4 and JMJD6 (Figures 2C, S1C, and
S1D), suggesting that they are recruited in a Kac-independent
manner. Intriguingly, JQ1 treatment also enhanced (LFC R2)
248 interactions, including the association between BRD4 and
the MRN complex (group XII in Figures 2A–2C and S1E), and
that between BRD4 and TP53 (Figures 2C and S1E). New prom-
inent interactions between BRD2/3/4 and KBTBD8, and be-
tween BRD3 and TCOF1 were also observed (Figure 2C).
To further validate these interactions and quantitative behav-
iors following JQ1 treatment, we performed immunoprecipitation
followed by MS using antibodies to endogenous BRD2, BRD3,
and BRD4 (using immunoglobulin G [IgG] as a negative control)
in the presence or absence of JQ1, in both HEK293 cells, and
in the chronic myeloid leukemia K562 cells, where we previously
examined the transcriptional outcome of BET targeting with JQ1
(Picaud et al., 2016). Despite issues of cross-reactivity and
binding site masking (see STAR Methods), we were able to vali-
date 239 of the 425 interactors of BRD2/3/4 detected across the
0 and 1-hr time points (56.2% validation; Tables S2G and S2H).
106 of the 319 interactors detected in the non-treated condition
(31%) were also previously identiﬁed in the AML HL-60 cells
(Dawson et al., 2011). Collectively, the endogenous datasets
provided validation to 67% of the FLAG interactions detected
in the absence of JQ1, conﬁrming the validity of our dataset.
Importantly, in HEK293s—and to a lesser extent in K652
cells—the quantitative trends observed following JQ1 treatment
were also recapitulated (Figure S1C; Table S2I). In particular,
components of complexes such as Mediator, TFIID, TFIIH, and
RNAPII increased in abundance following JQ1 treatment, while
histones and histone chaperones decreased.
Taken together, our data highlight the complex role of JQ1
treatment in the remodeling of the BET interactome, as recently
suggested (Bhagwat et al., 2016), with both losses and gains in
associations, as well as multiple interactions that are Kac inde-
pendent. To gain additional insight, we further explored these
three different classes of binding behavior.
Di-Kac Motifs on Histones and Non-histone Proteins Are
Recognized by BET BRDs
The large number of BET interactions lost following JQ treatment
in our proteomic screen prompted us to re-examine Kac-depen-
dent contributions to BET interactions with both histone and
non-histone proteins. Following up on initial ﬁndings for BRDT
(Morinie` re et al., 2009), we previously found preferential associ-
ation of histone H4 di-Kac motifs with an optimal linker of two
amino acids (Kac-XX-Kac; preference for glycine, G, at X1) and
identiﬁed a common structural template whereby both Kac insert
within the BET BRD cavity (Filippakopoulos et al., 2012). Here,
we applied a peptide SPOT binding approach to all histones,
conﬁrming their preferred association to Kac-XX-Kac sites
where XX are GG, GS, DG, AA, AP, AV, AQ, AR, SA, VL, LN,
TA, and TP, though we also detected several instances of bind-
ing via longer linkers (e.g., Kac-X3-4-Kac; Tables S3A and S3B).
We previously proposed (but did not test; Filippakopoulos
et al., 2012) that the electrostatic potential of residues surround-
ing the BRD Kac-binding cavity contributes to binding speciﬁcity
by selecting for favorable sequences outside the Kac-XX-Kac
motif. The human proteome contains over 43,000 unique
K-XX-K motifs, 2,100 (4.8%) harboring ‘‘histone-like’’ XX se-
quences. To determine whether ﬂanking sequences inﬂuence
binding to BET BRDs, we analyzed di-Kac histone-like peptides
by SPOT arrays with the two isolated BRDs of BRD4 (BD1 and
BD2, Tables S3C and S3D). Strikingly, we observed at least
moderate (R50%) binding intensity (compared to maximum
arising from multiple hexa-His-controls) toward 41.7% of all
peptides tested (928 and 549 peptides for BD1 and BD2 respec-
tively), with 28.9% of all peptides binding strongly (R75% of
maximum) to either BD1 or BD2, and binding to BD1 systemati-
cally more prominent (9.6% bound to both domains; 15.5% only
to BD1 and 3.8% only to BD2; Figures 3A and 3B). Diverse
ﬂanking sequences drove binding to either domain, with basic
sequences recognized by both, while leucine-rich sequences
were enriched primarily by BD1 (Figure 3C), consistent with the
charge dispersion on the surface surrounding the binding cav-
ities and the more hydrophobic character of BD1 (Figure S2A).
Based on our earlier work deﬁning the ﬂexible G at the X1 po-
sition as a binding preference for histone H4 (Filippakopoulos
et al., 2012), we ﬁxed this residue to screen a subset (91) of all
2521 unique K-GX-K motifs found in the human proteome,
focusing on nuclear proteins with Kac sites annotated in the
PhosphoSitePlus database. Again, both domains exhibited
some degree of binding, with BD1 systematically exhibiting
stronger binding (Figure S2B; Tables S3C and S3D). Isothermal
titration calorimetry (ITC) conﬁrmed interactions of selected pep-
tides with both domains, albeit with different afﬁnities (Table S4A;
Figures S2C and S2D). To better understand the binding behavior
of BET BRDs toward these non-histone peptides, we structurally
characterized interactions with a di-Kac peptide found in E2F1
(K117ac/K120ac; Figures 3D and S2E). Both lysines inserted
within the Kac-binding cavity of BRD4/BD1, with K117ac directly
engaging the conserved asparagine and K120ac initiating a
water-mediated interaction with K117ac, similar to histone H4
peptides (Filippakopoulos et al., 2012). Additional peptides
carrying a Kac-GX-Kac motif, including those from GATA1,
ATRX, POLR2A, and TOP2A, adopted the same histone H4-like
structural association with BRD4/BD1 (Figures 3E and S2F–
S2I). Our data therefore suggest that Kac-XX-Kac motifs beyond
those found in histones can be recognized by BET BRDs.
Di-Kac Motifs Separated by Long (>2) Linkers Are
Recognized by BET BRDs
Our structural analysis identiﬁed multiple cases of non-histone
proteins binding to BRD4 BRDs through histone-like motifs in
the same structural template we initially described for H4. How-
ever, when crystallizing a Kac-XX-Kac SIRT7 peptide (K272ac/
K275ac) with BRD4/BD1, we surprisingly found only the ﬁrst
Kac within the binding cavity. Strikingly, a bulky tyrosine residue
located 5 residues downstream of the ﬁrst lysine (Y277) instead
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638, February 7, 2019
625
A
B
D
C
E
Figure 3. BET BRDs Initiate Interactions with Non-histone Kac-XX-Kac Peptides
(A) Peptide SPOT validation of histone-like peptides containing a Kac-XX-Kac motif. The heatmap shows binding intensities against the ﬁrst (BD1) and second
(BD2) BRDs of BRD4. Peptides exhibiting strong (R75% of maximum) intensity toward one domain, with a R2-fold lower intensity toward the other domain are
highlighted.
(B) Unique peptides containing K-XX-K motifs found in the human proteome. The inset highlights the binding results from (A) toward BRD4 BRDs.
(C) Peptide LOGOs derived from very strong (R85% of maximum intensity) binding in the SPOT arrays shown in (A).
(legend continued on next page)
626
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638, February 7, 2019
inserted into the BRD cavity, stabilizing K272ac via a hydrogen
bond (Figures 4A and S3A). This, together with our ﬁnding that
several histone peptides with longer linkers readily bind BRD4
BRDs (Kac-X3–4-Kac; Tables S3A and S3B), suggested that
associations could be mediated via more diverse protein se-
quences and structural templates than initially suspected. To un-
derstand the mode of engagement of a single BET BRD toward
adjacent Kac marks separated by longer linkers, we crystallized
BRD4/BD1 with a histone H3 peptide carrying K9ac and K14ac
(Kac-X4-Kac motif) identiﬁed in our SPOT data (Tables S3A
and S3B). Interestingly, only K14ac bound within the BRD cavity,
while K9ac packed outside of the cavity, next to W81 (Figure 4B).
This resulted in an inverted peptide orientation compared to
Kac-XX-Kac peptides. While K14ac superimposed well with
K5ac from a H4 K5ac/K8ac peptide, the longer backbone linking
it to K9ac superimposed with K8ac, sterically ﬁlling the remaining
volume of the BRD cavity, and resulting in a small helical turn
(Figure S3B). Importantly, the conformations of S10 and T11,
and their contributions to the stabilization of this helical topology,
also suggested a functional role for their post-translational modi-
ﬁcation during binding. Indeed, while both BRD4 BRDs bind in
solution to H3 K9ac/K14ac (Figure S3C; Table S4A), phosphory-
lation of S10 had no effect on BD1 binding but abolished binding
to BD2, and phosphorylation of T11 abolished binding to both
BRD4 BRDs (Table S4A). These observations suggest that
adjacent sites separated by longer linkers can be recognized
by single BET BRDs (though with weaker afﬁnities than
XX linkers), with linker sequences offering the potential for regu-
lating interactions.
Tyrosine at +1 Can Substitute for a Second Kac in BET
BRD Binding
Intrigued by these unprecedented modes of binding, we next
analyzed the 181 unique proteins that decreased below our
limit of detection after 1-hr JQ1 treatment in the AP-MS data-
set: these contained 903 unique annotated Kac sites in Phos-
phoSitePlus (Tables S3F–S3I). Focusing on BRD4, which
associated with the largest number of annotated sites (456),
we examined the relative enrichment of amino acids with
respect to each central Kac (Figure S3D). Weak enrichment
of lysine at +3 suggested that it is unlikely that Kac-XX-Kac
sequences drive these interactions. By contrast, tyrosine
was clearly enriched at the +1 position for several regulated
preys, including histone H1 and BAZ1B, and peptide SPOT
arrays conﬁrmed binding of BRD4 to these sites (Table S3J).
We crystallized a K221ac BAZ1B peptide with BRD4/BD1
and observed typical Kac-engagement by N140 in the high-
resolution structure, while the adjacent tyrosine (BAZ1B
Y222) also inserted into the binding cavity, linking to K221ac
via a water-mediated bridge (Figure 4C). Although K221ac
superimposed well with K5ac in the H4 K5ac/K8ac complex
with BRD4/BD1, the peptide backbone followed a different
path, which induced structural changes on the surface of the
BRD4/BD1 module via side-chain re-alignment of D144,
I146, and L148, while inserting BAZ1B Y222 in the same space
as H4 K8ac (Figure S3E).
We asked therefore whether this mode of binding would be
conserved in the presence of a second Kac within a Kac-YX-
Kac motif; of the 1,091 K-YX-K sequences in the human prote-
ome, 84 have been found acetylated (PhosphoSitePlus) on the
ﬁrst lysine (Kac-YX-K), and 39 are di-acetylated (Kac-YX-Kac).
SRPK1 contains a Kac-YS-K motif, and its paralog, SRPK2, has
been reported as a BRD3 interactor in the BioGRID database.
We crystallized an SRPK1 K585ac/K588ac peptide with BRD4/
BD1 and found K585ac inserted within the cavity together with
Y586, while the K588ac remained outside the cavity (Figure 4D).
Importantly, validation of binding by ITC revealed similar afﬁnities
for Kac-Y epitopes compared to other Kac-XX-Kac motifs
(BRD4/BD1 versus SRPK1 or H4, KD = 9.9 mM; Table S4A; Fig-
ure S3F). In addition, both H4 and SRPK1 peptides were compet-
itively displaced by JQ1 in ALPHAScreen assays, supporting that
binding occurs within the BRD Kac cavity in solution (Figure S3G).
Further evaluation of binding by ITC suggested, however, that
these interactions with BRD4 have different thermodynamic
properties, with H4 association driven by enthalpic contributions
(consistent with multiple electrostatic interactions present in the
structural model, a larger surface presented to the protein and
a negative change in heat capacity, DCp), while SRPK1 associa-
tion was also driven by hydrophobic and entropic contributions
(consistent with a positive change in DCp; Figure S3H; Table
S4B). Taken together, our data suggest that Kac-Y motifs can
compensate for the absence of a second Kac, resulting in a
similar structural template that ﬁts within the volume of BET
BRD sites.
N-Terminal Tandem BET BRDs Adopt Extended
Conformations in Solution
Given this considerable expansion in the possible BET BRDs
sites, we next examined whether it would be possible for BET
proteins to engage independent target sites by employing both
N-terminal BRDs, which are linked by long (155–205 aa) ﬂexible
regions. Analytical ultracentrifugation revealed that the individual
domains do not self- or hetero-associate, while constructs con-
taining both domains adopt more extended linear conformations
(Figure 4E; Table S4C). These observations were further sup-
ported by in-solution small-angle X-ray scattering measure-
ments of tandem BET BRD constructs, which were monomeric
and ﬂexible, while ab initio and ensemble optimizations sup-
ported extended conformations (Figures 4F and S3I). Taken
together, our data suggest that tandem BET BRDs adopt
extended conformations in solution, possibly allowing for the
targeting of distinct sites by recognizing different Kac epitopes
in trans, and thus contributing to the assembly of large BET
complexes on chromatin.
(D) Crystal structure of BRD4/BD1 bound to an E2F1 di-Kac peptide (K117ac-XX-K120ac motif) or the previously published histone H4 K5ac/K8ac peptide
(PDB: 3UVW).
(E) Structural overlay of BRD4/BD1 complexes with Kac-GX-Kac-bearing peptides shown in cartoon, highlighting the topology of the BRD cavity with respect to
the conserved asparagine (N140) and the bulky tryptophan of the WPF shelf (W81).
See also Figure S2 and Tables S1, S3, S4, and S5.
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638, February 7, 2019
627
A
B
C
D
E
F
Figure 4. Different Modes of BET BRD Recognition of Kac
(A–D) Crystal structures of BRD4/BD1 bound to histone H4 (PDB: 3UVW) and indicated peptides derived from SIRT7 (A), di-Kac H3 (B), BAZ1B (C), and SRPK1
(D). The peptide 2Fc-Fo maps contoured at 2s are shown in the insets.
(E) Sedimentation velocity experiments of BET BRDs individually (BD1, BD2), in equimolar mixtures (1:1) or tandem constructs (BD1:2) demonstrating lack of
self- or hetero-association.
(F) Ab initio shapes of BET tandem BRD constructs restored from SAXS data; mean distances (n = 100) are shown next to the models, in agreement with the
hydrodynamic shape calculated using prolate ellipsoid models in (E).
See also Figure S3 and Tables S1, S3, S4, and S5.
628
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638, February 7, 2019
A
B
C
D
E
F
Figure 5. Contributions of the ET Domain to the BET Interactome
(A) Overlap of full-length (FL)-BRD4 interactors (within  ± 2 LFC in spectral count ratio following JQ1 treatment) and BRD4/ET domain highlighting 12 common
proteins.
(B) Recovery of FLAG-tagged BRD9 from pull-downs with indicated recombinant BRD4 domains.
(C) Identiﬁcation of the BRD9 binding site mediating interactions with BRD4/ET: (i) recovery of MBP-tagged BRD9 fragments with recombinant BRD4/ET domain;
(ii) peptide SPOT array of BRD91–99 blotted against the BRD4/ET domain; (iii) SPOT alanine-scanning of BRD920–38 against BRD4/ET.
(legend continued on next page)
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638, February 7, 2019
629
The BET ET Domain Provides a Protein Recruitment
Platform
Despite the large number of Kac-dependent interactions identi-
ﬁed in our proteomic screen, several of the interactors were rela-
tively insensitive to treatment with JQ1. BET family proteins
contain an ET domain consisting of three helices and an acidic
surface shaped in a continuous ridge (Lin et al., 2008; Figure S4A)
previously reported to mediate diverse protein interactions
(Konuma et al., 2017; Rahman et al., 2011; Sansam et al.,
2018; Zhang et al., 2016) and to associate with viral peptides
(Crowe et al., 2016). We hypothesized that the conserved ET
domain may recruit a fraction of the identiﬁed Kac-independent
interactions.
We tested this hypothesis for BRD4, which associated with 67
proteins whose abundance was relatively unaffected by JQ1 (i.e.,
within ± 2 LFC). AP-MS with a recombinant BRD4-ET domain
identiﬁed 151 high-conﬁdence interactors (Tables S2E and
S2J), 12 of which overlapped with proteins insensitive to JQ1 in
AP-MS (Figure 5A). We further explored the interaction between
BRD4 and the poorly characterized BRD-containing protein
BRD9 by performing pull-downs with biotinylated recombinant
BRD4 domains against 33FLAG-BRD9 expressed in HEK293
cells. Only the ET domain was able to pull down BRD9 and, as
expected, this interaction was not affected by JQ1 treatment
(Figure 5B). Reciprocal AP-MS with 33FLAG-BRD9 identiﬁed
endogenous BET proteins as interactors for both the full-length
protein and a BRD9 1–100 construct (Figure S4B; Table S2K).
Streptavidin pull-down of recombinant BRD9 proteins with bio-
tinylated recombinant BRD4/ET (Figure 5C/i) conﬁrmed a direct
interaction with the N terminus of BRD9, which was further vali-
dated by analytical ultracentrifugation (Figure S4C). Peptides
spanning BRD9 1–100 were synthesized on cellulose SPOT
arrays and probed with the recombinant BRD4/ET domain,
further narrowing down the interaction interface to amino acids
20–38 of BRD9 (Figure 5C/ii; Table S3K). Alanine scanning of
this region revealed a short linear motif (SLiM) combining basic
and hydrophobic residues (LKLVLKV) essential in initiating the
interaction with BRD4/ET (Figure 5C/iii; Table S3L), in a region
of the protein predicted to be disordered (Figure S4D).
To test whether similar SLiMs are present in the other proteins
in Figure 5A, we next examined the interaction with the methyl-
transferases WHSC1 and WHSC1L1 (also known as NSD2 and
NSD3). WHSC1L1 was previously found to interact with the ET
domain of BRD4 (Rahman et al., 2011), and more recently the
interaction interface was mapped to a region between amino
acids 98–265 (Shen et al., 2015). Peptide SPOT arrays within
this region identiﬁed a peptide (amino acids 147–162; Figure S4E;
Table S3N) that was further proﬁled by alanine scanning to reveal
a short basic and hydrophobic SLiM distinct from that in BRD9
that was responsible for interaction with BRD4/ET (IKLKI; Fig-
ure S4E; Table S3O).
Based on the BRD9 and WHSC1/L1 SLiMs deﬁned above,
we identiﬁed 135 similar peptide regions in our 12 candidate
ET-interacting proteins. Of those, 29 motifs in 11 independent
proteins bound in SPOT assays (Figure S4F; Tables S3P–S3R).
We iteratively expanded our analysis to the remaining 55 pro-
teins relatively unaffected by JQ1 treatment (Tables S3S–S3Z
and S2E) and deﬁned BRD9-like (fn-(F/[+])FF[+](F/[+])-fc) and
WHSC1/L1-like (fn-F[+]F[+]-fc) ET-binding motifs (Figure 5D;
Tables S3AA and S3AB, where F is one of M, L, V, I, F and [+]
is K or R), as well as several positively charged motifs (Fig-
ure S5A). To rule out non-speciﬁc interactions, we reversed the
polarity of the acidic interface of the BRD4/ET domain and
evaluated binding to the different SLiMs. While BRD4/ETWT pro-
duced strong SPOTs in peptide arrays for all identiﬁed SLiMs,
alanine scanning against wild-type (WT) or mutant ET domains
showed similar patterns for charged peptide SLiMs (Figure S5B),
suggesting that these are non-speciﬁc. By contrast, binding to
BRD9-like and WHSC1/L1-like SLiMs was lost when tested
against the BRD4/ETmut, indicating that these SLiMs initiate
BRD4-speciﬁc interactions (Figure 5E).
To assess whether the identiﬁed SLiMs are responsible for as-
sociation in cells, we immobilized mCherry-BRD4-LacR onto
chromatin through a LacO array in U-2 OS cells. While GFP-
BRD9WT co-localized with mCherry-BRD4-LacR, deletion of
the ET domain as well as deletion or mutation of the BRD9
SLiM resulted in loss of co-localization (Figure 5F). We observed
the same behavior with other BRD4 interacting partners,
including WHSC1L1 (Figure S5C) and proteins whose recovery
was not affected by JQ1 in AP-MS with full-length BRD4 and
contained BRD9- or WHSC1L1-like ET interaction motifs, such
as ZNF592 (Figure S5D). Taken together, our data demonstrate
that the BRD4 ET domain acts as a recruitment platform recog-
nizing distinct SLiMs on target proteins (Figure S5E). While this
interaction surface is mutated in cancer (Figure S5F), its precise
role in cell proliferation and survival remains to be established.
BRD3 Localizes to Ribosomal DNA
In the previous sections, we characterized interactions that were
either reduced following JQ1 treatment or relatively unaffected
and mediated by the ET domain. However, we were puzzled
by interactions that were enhanced following targeting of Kac-
dependent functions with JQ1. One of the most striking of those
was the recovery of TCOF1 with BRD3 (Figure 2C; 0 to 436 spec-
tral count sum). TCOF1 is a critical regulator of ribosome biogen-
esis localized to the nucleolus (Valdez et al., 2004), a cell
compartment not reported to contain BET proteins. Consistent
with a possible re-localization to this compartment, several
nucleolar proteins also increased in abundance in 33FLAG-
BRD3 immunoprecipitates following JQ1 treatment (Figures 2B
and 2C; Table S2A). Altogether, the BRD3 interactors that were
increased >2 LFC (102 proteins) were enriched for the GO
(D) Schematic of BET ET-motif discovery employing AP-MS, SPOT arrays, and alanine scanning. Reﬁned LOGO motifs are shown on the right. The bar charts on
the top of each LOGO represent the relative residue contribution to the overall peptide binding following SPOT-ALA scanned array quantiﬁcations.
(E) Assessment of the behavior in SPOT assays of the indicated motif classes upon polarity reversal of the ET surface (BRD4/ET wt vs mut).
(F) Cellular validation of ET-speciﬁc interactions using LacO/LacR chromatin immobilization. U-2 OS cells with a stably integrated LacO array were transfected
with FL-mCherry-BRD4 (WT or DET) and FL-GFP-BRD9 (WT or mutant).
See also Figures S4 and S5 and Tables S1, S2, and S3.
630
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638, February 7, 2019
A
B
D
C
E
Figure 6. BRD Inhibition Modulates BRD3 Localization
(A) Still images of indicated GFP-tagged BET constructs in live U-2 OS cells.
(B) Average BRD3 WT or (BD1:2)mut ChIP-seq read counts plotted over genes. TSS, transcription start site; TES, transcription end site. Inset: binding sites
detected with each construct.
(C) Genome browser tracks showing BRD3 occupancy across the MYC and CCND2 gene loci. y axis: normalized read counts in reads per million per basepair.
(legend continued on next page)
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638, February 7, 2019
631
biological process ‘‘ribosome biogenesis’’ (Table S2L), prompt-
ing us to further investigate this observation.
We ﬁrst performed live-cell imaging to determine whether BRD
inhibition resulted in localization of BET proteins to the nucleolus.
Upon JQ1 treatment, BRD3, and to a lesser extent BRD2, rapidly
(within 20 s) assembled into dense foci (Figure 6A) that per-
sisted for more than 12 hr after inhibitor washout (note that the
apparent loss of signal for BRD4 is likely due to its displacement
from chromatin, as the protein levels were not markedly found
affected by immunoblot). These BRD3 foci co-localized with
TCOF1 in the nucleolus, and their formation was prevented by
small interfering RNA (siRNA) depletion of TCOF1 (Figure S6A).
No noticeable change in the localization of the nucleolar proteins
PARP1, POLR1E, and TCOF1 was observed following JQ1 treat-
ment, suggesting that the overall organization of the nucleolus is
not altered by JQ1 (data not shown). To better understand the
response of BRD3 to JQ1, we employed constructs with point
mutations ablating Kac binding in the ﬁrst (BD1mut), second
(BD2mut), or both ((BD1:2)mut) BRDs. BD1mut resulted in a diffuse
nuclear localization in asynchronously growing cells, though the
mutant BRD3 still accumulated into foci upon JQ1 treatment
(Figure 6A). BD2mut prevented dense foci formation upon JQ1
treatment, yet the protein still accumulated in the nucleolus
upon JQ1 addition. (BD1:2)mut abolished the response to JQ1
treatment, and generated a nucleolar-enriched signal in both
treated and untreated cells. Deletions of regions surrounding
BRD3 BRDs (1–42; 128–315 or 403–570) did not impact BRD3
capacity to form dense nucleoli foci (data not shown), further
supporting involvement of BRD3 BRDs in this response.
We recently demonstrated that the proximity-dependent bio-
tinylation approach BioID is ideally suited to deﬁne the organiza-
tion of membraneless organelles (similar to the nucleolus, e.g.,
Youn et al., 2018). BioID permits the identiﬁcation of proximity
partners in the context of a living cell and negates the mainte-
nance of interactions during lysis and puriﬁcation steps required
for AP-MS. Here, we performed BioID experiments in the pres-
ence or absence of 500 nM JQ1 for 24 hr (Figure S6B; Table
S2M). As expected, prolonged JQ1 treatment resulted in the
reduced association of BRD3 with >50 of its AP-MS-identiﬁed
partners (Table S2A) with a concurrent increase in nucleolar pro-
tein partners, such as RNAPI and UBTF, a key transcription fac-
tor required for ribosomal RNA, rRNA) production and TCOF1
(Figure S6C). BD2mut lost the association with RNAPI compo-
nents and associated proteins such as UBTF upon JQ1 treat-
ment, while (BD1:2)mut recovered a higher level of nucleolar
proteins, including TCOF1, in the absence of JQ1 treatment (Fig-
ures S6B and S6C).
Since BRD4 actively participates in numerous facets of
transcription by RNAPII (reviewed in Bradner et al., 2017), we
speculated that BRD3 may participate analogously in rRNA tran-
scription in the nucleolus. To investigate this, we expressed
GFP-tagged BRD3 WT or (BD1:2)mut in Flp-In T-REx U-2 OS cells
and interrogated their genome-wide distribution using chromatin
immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq). (BD1:2)mut resulted
in genome-wide loss of signal (Figure 6B), and in agreement with
previous studies (Anders et al., 2014) we found BRD3 WT at pro-
moters and enhancers, as determined by analysis of ChIP-seq
signals and chromatin states from published U-2 OS cell exper-
iments (Walz et al., 2014; Figures 6C, S6D, and S6E). (BD1:2)mut
exhibited a loss of 84% of the peaks with no robust binding site
gains over BRD3 WT (Figures S6D and S6E). This loss could be
clearly seen at many BRD3-occupied loci, including BRD4-
target loci such as the MYC oncogene that is downregulated
by JQ1 treatment (Delmore et al., 2011), as well as CCND2, a
G1/S oncogenic cyclin (Dooley et al., 2016; Figure 6C).
In contrast, by comparing BRD3 WT and (BD1:2)mut occu-
pancy at the rDNA gene locus by aligning ChIP-seq reads to
a single rDNA repeat, we observed BRD3 WT localization
throughout the rDNA intergenic spacer (IGS), while BRD muta-
tions redirected the protein to the transcribed rDNA regions (Fig-
ure 6D), displaying high similarity to published TCOF1 ChIP-seq
data from HeLa cells (Calo et al., 2018; Figures S6F and S6G).
This behavior was phenocopied by JQ1 treatment, which dis-
placed BRD3 from the rDNA IGS region toward the transcribed
regions in U-2 OS cells (Figure 6E), consistent with an increased
association with TCOF1, UBTF, and RNAPI (Figures S6B and
S6C). Taken together, our data suggest that BRD3 may play an
unsuspected role in the regulation of rRNA expression.
BRD3 Impacts rRNA Production and Cell Proliferation
To assess BRD3 impact on rRNA expression, we employed a
nascent RNA imaging-based 5-ethyl uridine (5-EU) incorporation
assay (Larsen et al., 2014). BRD3 speckles co-localizing with the
nucleolar marker ﬁbrillarin displayed reduced 5-EU incorpora-
tion, compared to regions devoid of BRD3, suggesting that these
speckles are refractory to transcription (Figure 7A). Furthermore,
BRD3 overexpression reduced 5-EU incorporation in nascent
rRNA in a dose-dependent manner (Figure 7B), while prolonged
BRD3 overexpression drastically reduced cell proliferation (Fig-
ure 7C). Overexpressing BRD3 (BD1:2)mut instead resulted in
modest increases in both rRNA production (Figure S7A) and
cell proliferation (Figure 7D), in support of the notion that BRD3
repressive functions at the rDNA IGS occur through BRD-depen-
dent interactions. Mining a large dataset of pooled CRISPR
screens in cancer cell lines (Meyers et al., 2017) further sup-
ported an anti-proliferative role for BRD3. While deletion of
BRD4 impedes a cell’s competitive advantage across 342 cell
lines proﬁled, BRD3 depletion caused instead a modest but clear
positive gene effect (Figure 7E), suggesting that the anti-prolifer-
ative function of BRD3 is not cell type speciﬁc.
(D) Schematic representation of a single human rDNA repeat relative to the transcription start site (TSS) of the rDNA repeat (x axis; based on GenBank U13369;
SP: spacer promoter; UCE, upstream control element; IGS, intergenic spacer; CP, core promoter). y axis: normalized read counts of BRD3 WT, (BD1:2)mut, and
TCOF1 (from HeLa cells; Calo et al., 2018).
(E) GFP-BRD3 ChIP-qPCR to rDNA H0, H1, and H27 (see D) with and without JQ1 for 1 hr. x axis: signal fold enrichment against rabbit IgG isotype
control puriﬁcations. Data represent the mean ± SEM (n = 3) of two biological replicates. p values were calculated using Student’s t test and are represented by
***p < 0.001; **p < 0.01; ns, not signiﬁcant.
See also Figure S6 and Tables S1 and S2.
632
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638, February 7, 2019
B
C
F
E
D
A
Figure 7. BRD3 Impacts rRNA Production and Cell Proliferation
(A) U-2 OS cells were treated with JQ1 or DMSO for 1 hr and then fed 5-EU for 1 hr prior to staining for BRD3, ﬁbrillarin (FIB), and click chemistry to
5-EU-labeled RNA.
(B) Quantitative immunoﬂuorescence of U-2 OS cells treated with various concentrations of tetracycline (to titrate BRD3 levels) or JQ1. 5-EU signal overlapping
with ﬁbrillarin signal (i.e., nucleolar RNA) was quantiﬁed for >400 cells for each experimental condition. ***p value <0.001, by two-tailed Student’s t test.
(C) Cell proliferation assay for U-2 OS treated with tetracycline over 6 days (n = 3).
(D) Cell proliferation assay for U-2 OS cells induced with 1 mg/mL tetracycline over 6 days (n = 3).
(legend continued on next page)
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638, February 7, 2019
633
While it is tempting to speculate that the role of BRD3 in rRNA
production may underlie its effects on cell proliferation, our ChIP-
seq analysis of WT and (BD1:2)mut cells also suggest that BRD3
may have additional roles on Pol II transcripts, perhaps through
competition with BRD4 for common binding sites. We titrated
increasing amounts of BRD3 and analyzed the impact on
BRD4 recruitment to the MYC TSS by qRT-PCR. BRD3 expres-
sion reduced BRD4 occupancy at the MYC TSS, similarly to JQ1
treatment (Figure S7B), suggesting that competition is possible,
at least in an overexpression system. Interpretation of these data
is, however, further complicated by the fact that BRD3 expres-
sion may also affect the levels of other BETs. Indeed, we ﬁnd
signiﬁcant occupancy of BRD3 WT at the TSSs of BRD2 and
BRD4 (Figure S7C). Furthermore, we observed a reduction in
BRD2 and BRD4 protein levels following ectopic expression of
33FLAG-BRD3 in HEK293 cells, while overexpression of any
BET reduces the protein levels of the other family members, sug-
gesting a previously unsuspected functional interplay between
BET proteins at RNAPII sites (Figures S7D and S7E) that will,
however, need to be further substantiated in contexts outside
of forced overexpression.
In summary, we uncovered an unsuspected modulation of
the BRD3 interactome toward ribosomal biosynthesis genes
upon JQ1 treatment, revealing a role for BRD3 in ribosomal
biogenesis. We also report an anti-proliferative role for BRD3
that can be attributed in part to its regulation of rRNA
expression but may also be associated with regulation of the
other BET family proteins and competition for their RNAPII
targets.
DISCUSSION
In this manuscript, we ﬁrst deﬁned classes of BET interactors
with differing quantitative behaviors following pharmacological
treatment (decreased, inhibitor independent, and increased),
though it remains to be determined where these interactions
occur (i.e., on chromatin or in the nucleoplasm).
We show that Kac-XX-Kac sites on non-histone proteins
insert both Kac in the BRD cavity as in the previously character-
ized histone H4 peptide (Filippakopoulos et al., 2012; Morinie` re
et al., 2009), while longer linkers can insert bulky residues in
place of the second Kac (e.g., SIRT7 Kac-X4-Y motif). Phos-
phorylation on the longer linker on histone H3 (Kac-X4-Kac;
the second Kac being outside of the BRD) affects BET binding,
potentially linking cellular signaling events to epigenetic circuits.
Together with the discovery of binding to a new Kac-Y motif
(>16,000 KY motifs are encoded in the human proteome), we
suggest that the BET BRDs can contact a larger target space
than previously appreciated. While our ﬁndings still require
testing in a physiological context, they are consistent with a
growing list of documented direct associations between BET
BRDs and non-histone proteins (reviewed in Fujisawa and Fili-
ppakopoulos, 2017). Since we also found that all BET tandem
BRDs adopt extended and ﬂexible conformations in solution,
it is possible that remote sites within the same or different pro-
teins can be recognized, allowing one BRD to engage a histone
while the other simultaneously recruits a non-histone protein
through Kac-dependent interactions.
We also systematically characterized two distinct speciﬁc ET-
interaction motifs for BRD4 (corresponding to motifs mapped to
BRD9 and WHSC1/WHSC1L1) that lead to binary interactions for
a large portion of the JQ1-insensitive interactome. BRD2 and
BRD3 also associated with BRD9 and WHSC1/WHSC1L1 by
AP-MS, suggesting that they share association with these SLiMs
(Table S2A), and this is supported by analysis by AP-MS of BRD3
WT and DET protein (Table S2N). Inspection of published ChIP-
seq data further revealed overlap between BRD4 and BRD9
peaks in mouse AML cells (Hohmann et al., 2016; Shi et al.,
2013), and between BRD4 and NuRD component CHD4 in
mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) (Flynn et al., 2016; Luo
et al., 2015), suggesting that these proteins may occupy many
common loci genome-wide (Figure S7F). Together, this suggests
that the ET-recruitment platform may play a role in maintaining
transcriptional complexes on chromatin. Since several cancer
patient mutations are expected to perturb this fold (Figure S5F),
it is possible that loss of ET-mediated interactions contributes to
tumor proliferation. Virus proteins have also evolved to hijack this
recruitment platform (reviewed in Aydin and Schelhaas, 2016)
leading to tight association with the ET domain employing similar
motifs to those described here (Crowe et al., 2016).
An initially surprising ﬁnding from our data in light of the well-
documented role of BRD4 in transcriptional activation is the re-
covery of negative transcriptional regulators (including NuRD
and NELF). While JQ1 treatment generally results in transcrip-
tional repression, we and others have previously reported that
subsets of genes are instead upregulated (Love´ n et al., 2013;
Muhar et al., 2018; Picaud et al., 2013, 2016; Zuber et al.,
2011), suggesting a locus-speciﬁc de-repression of transcription
by BET inhibition, the mechanisms of which remain to be studied.
Our studies also revealed an unsuspected reorganization of BET
interactomes following BRD inhibition, which included re-locali-
zation of BRD3 to nucleolar speckles where it can dampen
rRNA transcription but only in the presence of functional BRDs.
We also report a negative role for BRD3 in cell proliferation in
our model system that depends on its BRDs, which was corrob-
orated by large-scale genome-wide CRISPR datasets (Meyers
et al., 2017). Besides its negative regulation of rRNA transcription,
which should contribute to decreased growth, the roles of BRD3
in controlling proliferation are likely more complex, and we pre-
sent initial evidence for competition with BRD4 for shared targets,
as well as an unexpected role of BRD3 levels in regulating the
levels of BRD4, and vice versa, at least in the context of overex-
pressed proteins (schematics in Figure 7F). This has potential
implications for cancer etiology, and there are at least some
(E) Violin plots of CERES scores showing gene depletion effects from CRISPR-Cas9 loss-of-function screens in 342 cancer cell lines (Meyers et al., 2017).
(F) Model of BET protein recruitment functions and the impact of BRD3 overexpression. In proliferating cells, BETs bind to acetylated proteins, including histones
through their tandem BRDs, and recruit to chromatin additional transcriptional regulators through other modular domains. High levels of BRD3 antagonize this by
decreasing the levels of other BETs, and competing for binding to common loci, in addition to reducing rRNA levels, with a net result of decreasing proliferation.
See also Figure S7 and Tables S1 and S2.
634
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638, February 7, 2019
instances in cancer datasets, such as in lung cancer (Sza´ sz et al.,
2016), where BRD3 and BRD4 levels have opposite associations
with patient survival, with both high BRD3 levels and low BRD4
levels showing protective effects (Figure S7G).
Together, our results suggest that a potentially important
parameter that should be assessed when evaluating therapeutic
inhibition with pan-BET compounds (such as JQ1) is the level of
BRD3 expression in relation to other BET proteins. For instance,
osteosarcoma HOS cells resistant to JQ1 display increased
levels of BRD2 and BRD4 concurrent with a reduction of BRD3
when compared to matched JQ1-sensitive control cells, high-
lighting that increased BRD3 function does not promote cell
growth in this system and that its inhibition may have undesirable
consequences (Lamoureux et al., 2014). Finally, it is worth noting
that diverse types of cancer cells (Shu et al., 2016) are ‘‘ad-
dicted’’ to high BRD4 levels to maintain a pro-proliferative
transcriptional program, which could negatively impact the
expression levels of BRD2 and BRD3, which in the case of
BRD3 could contribute to increased proliferation. We propose
that inhibitors that would speciﬁcally target, e.g., BRD4 but not
BRD3, should be actively pursued, and some initial reports sug-
gest that this may be feasible (Nowak et al., 2018). In this regard,
while it has so far proved difﬁcult to develop BRD inhibitors that
exhibit high speciﬁcity for a single BET, perhaps targeting addi-
tional protein-protein interaction domains, such as the ET, may
provide alternative ways to modulate BET association and
recruitment with transcriptional complexes, thus improving the
current therapeutic window.
STAR+METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper
and include the following:
d KEY RESOURCES TABLE
d CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
B Cell Lines
d METHOD DETAILS
B BET Inhibitors
B Cloning
B Mutagenesis
B Cell Line Generation
B FLAG Afﬁnity Puriﬁcation Using a Chromatin Optimized
Protocol
B Endogenous Immunoprecipitation for Mass Spec-
trometry
B Proximity-Dependent
Biotinylation
Mass
Spec-
trometry
B Recombinant Domain Pull-Downs for Mass Spec-
trometry
B Experimental Design for Mass Spectrometry Exper-
iments
B Preparation of HPLC Columns for Mass Spectrometry
B Mass Spectrometry Acquisition Using TripleTOF Mass
Spectrometers
B Mass Spectrometry Acquisition Using LTQ-Orbitrap
Mass Spectrometers
B Data-Dependent Acquisition MS Analysis
B Data Independent Acquisition Analysis with MSPLIT
B MS Data Visualization and Archiving
B Comparison of the Interaction Proteomics Datasets
B Validation of Interactions by Immunoblotting
B Interactome and Kac Literature Overlap Analysis
B Protein Expression and Puriﬁcation
B Electro-spray Quadrupole Time of Flight Mass Spec-
trometry
B SPOT Peptide Assays
B Discovery of Histone-like Kac-X2-Kac Motifs Recog-
nized by BET BRDs
B Discovery of Novel Kac Sequences Recognized by
BET BRDs
B Extra-Terminal Domain Consensus Motif Discovery
B Custom Peptide Synthesis
B Isothermal Titration Calorimetry
B Sedimentation Velocity Analytical Ultracentrifugation
B ALPHAScreen Assay
B Crystallization
B Data Collection and Structure Determination
B Small Angle X-Ray Scattering
B Confocal Microscopy for Co-localization Using the
LacO Array
B LacO Array High Content Analysis
B Live-Cell Imaging of BET Responses to JQ1 Treatment
B Immunoﬂuorescence
Microscopy
of
Nucleolar
Proteins
B Quantitation
of
Ribosomal
RNA
by
Immunoﬂuo-
rescence
B ChIP-qPCR
B Chromatin Immunoprecipitation
B ChIP-Seq Data Analysis
B ChIP-Seq Peak Calling
B ChIP-Seq Promoter Enrichment
B ChIP-Seq Signal Density Heatmap
B Chromatin State Segmentations
B BET Protein Essentiality Analysis in Cancer Cells
d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
B Proteomics Quantiﬁcation and Statistical Analysis
B Quantiﬁcation
and
Statistical
Analysis
of
Micro-
scopy Data
B ChIP-qPCR Quantitation
B ChIP-Seq Peak Overlap
d DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
B Data Deposition
d ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes seven ﬁgures and ﬁve tables and can be
found with this article online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2018.11.006.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank B. Larsen, G. Liu, and J.P. Zhang for help with proteomics; D. Litch-
ﬁeld for CK2 antibodies; M. Minden for K562 cells; Diamond Light Source for
beam-time (proposals mx6391, mx10619, mx15433); the staff of beamlines
B21, I02, I03, and I24 for assistance with testing and data collection; and B.
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638, February 7, 2019
635
Raught for critical review of the manuscript. This work was supported by the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research Foundation (CIHR FDN 143301 to
A.-C.G.; fellowships to N.S. and J.-P.L.), Genome Canada and Ontario Geno-
mics (OGI-139 to A.-C.G.), the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada (fellowship to J.-P.L.), the US NIH grant (5P41GM103484
to N.B.), the Ludwig Institute (P.F.), the Medical Research Council (MR/
N010051/1 to P.F.), the Wellcome Trust (Career Development Fellowship,
095751/Z/11/Z to P.F.), TD Bank fellowships (J.-P.L. and N.S.), the Cancer
Research Society (M.D.W., fellowship to J.-P.L.), the Isaiah 40:31 Memorial
Fund (M.D.W.), the Uehara Memorial Foundation (201330102 to T.F.), the Esto-
nian Research Council (PUTJD145 to L.U.-R.), the University of Toronto
(fellowship to H.H.), the Sloan Foundation (N.B.), and the Structural Genomics
Consortium, a registered charity (number 1097737) that receives funds from
AbbVie, Bayer Pharma AG, Boehringer Ingelheim, Canada Foundation for
Innovation, Eshelman Institute for Innovation, Genome Canada, Innovative
Medicines Initiative (EU/EFPIA) (ULTRA-DD grant no. 115766), Janssen,
Merck & Co., Novartis Pharma AG, Ontario Ministry of Economic Development
and Innovation, Pﬁzer, Sa˜ o Paulo Research Foundation-FAPESP, Takeda, and
Wellcome Trust (092809/Z/10/Z). A.-C.G., L.P., and M.D.W. are Canada
Research Chairs in Functional Proteomics, Centrosome Biogenesis and Func-
tion, and Comparative Genomics, respectively, and M.D.W. is supported by an
Early Researcher Award from Ontario.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization and
Methodology,
J.-P.L.,
S.P.,
P.F.,
and
A.-C.G.;
Software, J.D.R.K. and N.B.; Investigation, J.-P.L., P.S., S.P., T.F., L.U.-R.,
G.D.G., M.T., J.D.R.K., B.G.-B., N.S., and J.A.N.; Formal Analysis, H.H.;
Resources, M.S.; Data Curation, J.-P.L., and S.P.; Writing, Review and Editing,
J.-P.L., S.P., H.H., M.D.W., P.F., and A.-C.G.; Supervision, Project Administra-
tion, and Funding Acquisition: M.D.W., P.F., and A.-C.G.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
Received: April 25, 2018
Revised: September 6, 2018
Accepted: November 2, 2018
Published: December 13, 2018
REFERENCES
Anders, L., Guenther, M.G., Qi, J., Fan, Z.P., Marineau, J.J., Rahl, P.B., Love´ n,
J., Sigova, A.A., Smith, W.B., Lee, T.I., et al. (2014). Genome-wide localization
of small molecules. Nat. Biotechnol. 32, 92–96.
Aydin, I., and Schelhaas, M. (2016). Viral genome tethering to host cell chro-
matin: cause and consequences. Trafﬁc 17, 327–340.
Basham, M., Filik, J., Wharmby, M.T., Chang, P.C., El Kassaby, B., Gerring, M.,
Aishima, J., Levik, K., Pulford, B.C., Sikharulidze, I., et al. (2015). Data Analysis
WorkbeNch (DAWN). J. Synchrotron Radiat. 22, 853–858.
Beavis, R.C. (2006). Using the global proteome machine for protein identiﬁca-
tion. Methods Mol. Biol. 328, 217–228.
Bernstein, B.E., Meissner, A., and Lander, E.S. (2007). The mammalian epige-
nome. Cell 128, 669–681.
Bhagwat, A.S., Roe, J.S., Mok, B.Y.L., Hohmann, A.F., Shi, J., and Vakoc, C.R.
(2016). BET Bromodomain inhibition releases the mediator complex from
select cis-regulatory elements. Cell Rep. 15, 519–530.
Bradner, J.E., Hnisz, D., and Young, R.A. (2017). Transcriptional addiction in
cancer. Cell 168, 629–643.
Calo, E., Gu, B., Bowen, M.E., Aryan, F., Zalc, A., Liang, J., Flynn, R.A., Swigut,
T., Chang, H.Y., Attardi, L.D., and Wysocka, J. (2018). Tissue-selective effects
of nucleolar stress and rDNA damage in developmental disorders. Nature 554,
112–117.
Choi, H., Larsen, B., Lin, Z.Y., Breitkreutz, A., Mellacheruvu, D., Fermin, D.,
Qin, Z.S., Tyers, M., Gingras, A.C., and Nesvizhskii, A.I. (2011). SAINT: proba-
bilistic scoring of afﬁnity puriﬁcation-mass spectrometry data. Nat. Methods
8, 70–73.
Crowe, B.L., Larue, R.C., Yuan, C., Hess, S., Kvaratskhelia, M., and Foster,
M.P. (2016). Structure of the Brd4 ET domain bound to a C-terminal motif
from g-retroviral integrases reveals a conserved mechanism of interaction.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113, 2086–2091.
Dawson, M.A., Prinjha, R.K., Dittmann, A., Giotopoulos, G., Bantscheff, M.,
Chan, W.I., Robson, S.C., Chung, C.W., Hopf, C., Savitski, M.M., et al.
(2011). Inhibition of BET recruitment to chromatin as an effective treatment
for MLL-fusion leukaemia. Nature 478, 529–533.
Delmore, J.E., Issa, G.C., Lemieux, M.E., Rahl, P.B., Shi, J., Jacobs, H.M.,
Kastritis, E., Gilpatrick, T., Paranal, R.M., Qi, J., et al. (2011). BET bromodo-
main inhibition as a therapeutic strategy to target c-Myc. Cell 146, 904–917.
Dhalluin, C., Carlson, J.E., Zeng, L., He, C., Aggarwal, A.K., and Zhou, M.M.
(1999). Structure and ligand of a histone acetyltransferase bromodomain.
Nature 399, 491–496.
Dooley, K.E., Warburton, A., and McBride, A.A. (2016). Tandemly integrated
HPV16 can form a Brd4-dependent super-enhancer-like element that drives
transcription of viral oncogenes. MBio 7, e01446–e01416.
Doroshow, D.B., Eder, J.P., and LoRusso, P.M. (2017). BET inhibitors: a novel
epigenetic approach. Ann. Oncol. 28, 1776–1787.
Eng, J.K., Jahan, T.A., and Hoopmann, M.R. (2013). Comet: an open-source
MS/MS sequence database search tool. Proteomics 13, 22–24.
Ernst, J., and Kellis, M. (2012). ChromHMM: automating chromatin-state dis-
covery and characterization. Nat. Methods 9, 215–216.
Filippakopoulos, P., Qi, J., Picaud, S., Shen, Y., Smith, W.B., Fedorov, O.,
Morse, E.M., Keates, T., Hickman, T.T., Felletar, I., et al. (2010). Selective inhi-
bition of BET bromodomains. Nature 468, 1067–1073.
Filippakopoulos, P., Picaud, S., Mangos, M., Keates, T., Lambert, J.P.,
Barsyte-Lovejoy, D., Felletar, I., Volkmer, R., M€uller, S., Pawson, T., et al.
(2012). Histone recognition and large-scale structural analysis of the human
bromodomain family. Cell 149, 214–231.
Flynn, R.A., Do, B.T., Rubin, A.J., Calo, E., Lee, B., Kuchelmeister, H., Rale, M.,
Chu, C., Kool, E.T., Wysocka, J., et al. (2016). 7SK-BAF axis controls pervasive
transcription at enhancers. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 23, 231–238.
Franke, D., Petoukhov, M.V., Konarev, P.V., Panjkovich, A., Tuukkanen, A.,
Mertens, H.D.T., Kikhney, A.G., Hajizadeh, N.R., Franklin, J.M., Jeffries,
C.M., and Svergun, D.I. (2017). ATSAS 2.8: a comprehensive data analysis
suite for small-angle scattering from macromolecular solutions. J. Appl.
Cryst. 50, 1212–1225.
French, C.A., Kutok, J.L., Faquin, W.C., Toretsky, J.A., Antonescu, C.R.,
Grifﬁn,
C.A.,
Nose,
V.,
Vargas,
S.O.,
Moschovi,
M.,
Tzortzatou-
Stathopoulou, F., et al. (2004). Midline carcinoma of children and young adults
with NUT rearrangement. J. Clin. Oncol. 22, 4135–4139.
Fujisawa, T., and Filippakopoulos, P. (2017). Functions of bromodomain-con-
taining proteins and their roles in homeostasis and cancer. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell
Biol. 18, 246–262.
Gaucher, J., Boussouar, F., Montellier, E., Curtet, S., Buchou, T., Bertrand, S.,
Hery, P., Jounier, S., Depaux, A., Vitte, A.L., et al. (2012). Bromodomain-
dependent stage-speciﬁc male genome programming by Brdt. EMBO J. 31,
3809–3820.
Heger, A., Webber, C., Goodson, M., Ponting, C.P., and Lunter, G. (2013).
GAT: a simulation framework for testing the association of genomic intervals.
Bioinformatics 29, 2046–2048.
Hohmann, A.F., Martin, L.J., Minder, J.L., Roe, J.S., Shi, J., Steurer, S., Bader,
G., McConnell, D., Pearson, M., Gerstberger, T., et al. (2016). Sensitivity and
engineered resistance of myeloid leukemia cells to BRD9 inhibition. Nat.
Chem. Biol. 12, 672–679.
Jacobson, R.H., Ladurner, A.G., King, D.S., and Tjian, R. (2000). Structure and
function of a human TAFII250 double bromodomain module. Science 288,
1422–1425.
Jang, M.K., Mochizuki, K., Zhou, M., Jeong, H.S., Brady, J.N., and Ozato, K.
(2005). The bromodomain protein Brd4 is a positive regulatory component of
636
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638, February 7, 2019
P-TEFb and stimulates RNA polymerase II-dependent transcription. Mol. Cell
19, 523–534.
Kabsch, W. (2010). XDS. Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr. 66, 125–132.
Kim, S., Mischerikow, N., Bandeira, N., Navarro, J.D., Wich, L., Mohammed,
S., Heck, A.J., and Pevzner, P.A. (2010). The generating function of CID,
ETD, and CID/ETD pairs of tandem mass spectra: Applications to database
search. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 9, 2840–2852.
Knight, J.D., Liu, G., Zhang, J.P., Pasculescu, A., Choi, H., and Gingras, A.C.
(2015). A web-tool for visualizing quantitative protein-protein interaction data.
Proteomics 15, 1432–1436.
Knight, J.D.R., Choi, H., Gupta, G.D., Pelletier, L., Raught, B., Nesvizhskii, A.I.,
and Gingras, A.C. (2017). ProHits-viz: a suite of web tools for visualizing inter-
action proteomics data. Nat. Methods 14, 645–646.
Konuma, T., Yu, D., Zhao, C., Ju, Y., Sharma, R., Ren, C., Zhang, Q., Zhou,
M.M., and Zeng, L. (2017). Structural mechanism of the oxygenase JMJD6
recognition by the extraterminal (ET) domain of BRD4. Sci. Rep. 7, 16272.
Lambert, J.P., Tucholska, M., Pawson, T., and Gingras, A.C. (2014).
Incorporating DNA shearing in standard afﬁnity puriﬁcation allows simulta-
neous identiﬁcation of both soluble and chromatin-bound interaction partners.
J. Proteomics 100, 55–59.
Lambert, J.P., Tucholska, M., Go, C., Knight, J.D., and Gingras, A.C. (2015).
Proximity biotinylation and afﬁnity puriﬁcation are complementary approaches
for the interactome mapping of chromatin-associated protein complexes.
J. Proteomics 118, 81–94.
Lamoureux, F., Baud’huin, M., Rodriguez Calleja, L., Jacques, C., Berreur, M.,
Re´ dini, F., Lecanda, F., Bradner, J.E., Heymann, D., and Ory, B. (2014).
Selective inhibition of BET bromodomain epigenetic signalling interferes with
the bone-associated tumour vicious cycle. Nat. Commun. 5, 3511.
Larsen, D.H., Hari, F., Clapperton, J.A., Gwerder, M., Gutsche, K., Altmeyer,
M., Jungmichel, S., Toledo, L.I., Fink, D., Rask, M.B., et al. (2014). The
NBS1-Treacle complex controls ribosomal RNA transcription in response to
DNA damage. Nat. Cell Biol. 16, 792–803.
Li, H., and Durbin, R. (2009). Fast and accurate short read alignment with
Burrows-Wheeler transform. Bioinformatics 25, 1754–1760.
Lin, Y.J., Umehara, T., Inoue, M., Saito, K., Kigawa, T., Jang, M.K., Ozato, K.,
Yokoyama, S., Padmanabhan, B., and G€untert, P. (2008). Solution structure of
the extraterminal domain of the bromodomain-containing protein BRD4.
Protein Sci. 17, 2174–2179.
Liu, G., Knight, J.D., Zhang, J.P., Tsou, C.C., Wang, J., Lambert, J.P., Larsen,
B., Tyers, M., Raught, B., Bandeira, N., et al. (2016). Data independent acqui-
sition analysis in ProHits 4.0. J. Proteomics 149, 64–68.
Love´ n, J., Hoke, H.A., Lin, C.Y., Lau, A., Orlando, D.A., Vakoc, C.R., Bradner,
J.E., Lee, T.I., and Young, R.A. (2013). Selective inhibition of tumor oncogenes
by disruption of super-enhancers. Cell 153, 320–334.
Luo, Z., Gao, X., Lin, C., Smith, E.R., Marshall, S.A., Swanson, S.K., Florens, L.,
Washburn, M.P., and Shilatifard, A. (2015). Zic2 is an enhancer-binding factor
required for embryonic stem cell speciﬁcation. Mol. Cell 57, 685–694.
Mertz, J.A., Conery, A.R., Bryant, B.M., Sandy, P., Balasubramanian, S., Mele,
D.A., Bergeron, L., and Sims, R.J., 3rd (2011). Targeting MYC dependence in
cancer by inhibiting BET bromodomains. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108,
16669–16674.
Meyers, R.M., Bryan, J.G., McFarland, J.M., Weir, B.A., Sizemore, A.E., Xu, H.,
Dharia, N.V., Montgomery, P.G., Cowley, G.S., Pantel, S., et al. (2017).
Computational correction of copy number effect improves speciﬁcity of
CRISPR-Cas9 essentiality screens in cancer cells. Nat. Genet. 49, 1779–1784.
Morinie` re, J., Rousseaux, S., Steuerwald, U., Soler-Lo´ pez, M., Curtet, S., Vitte,
A.L., Govin, J., Gaucher, J., Sadoul, K., Hart, D.J., et al. (2009). Cooperative
binding of two acetylation marks on a histone tail by a single bromodomain.
Nature 461, 664–668.
Muhar, M., Ebert, A., Neumann, T., Umkehrer, C., Jude, J., Wieshofer, C.,
Rescheneder, P., Lipp, J.J., Herzog, V.A., Reichholf, B., et al. (2018). SLAM-
seq deﬁnes direct gene-regulatory functions of the BRD4-MYC axis.
Science 360, 800–805.
Nicodeme, E., Jeffrey, K.L., Schaefer, U., Beinke, S., Dewell, S., Chung, C.W.,
Chandwani, R., Marazzi, I., Wilson, P., Coste, H., et al. (2010). Suppression of
inﬂammation by a synthetic histone mimic. Nature 468, 1119–1123.
Nowak, R.P., DeAngelo, S.L., Buckley, D., He, Z., Donovan, K.A., An, J.,
Safaee, N., Jedrychowski, M.P., Ponthier, C.M., Ishoey, M., et al. (2018).
Plasticity in binding confers selectivity in ligand-induced protein degradation.
Nat. Chem. Biol. 14, 706–714.
Owen, D.J., Ornaghi, P., Yang, J.C., Lowe, N., Evans, P.R., Ballario, P.,
Neuhaus, D., Filetici, P., and Travers, A.A. (2000). The structural basis for the
recognition of acetylated histone H4 by the bromodomain of histone acetyl-
transferase gcn5p. EMBO J. 19, 6141–6149.
Patel, M.C., Debrosse, M., Smith, M., Dey, A., Huynh, W., Sarai, N.,
Heightman, T.D., Tamura, T., and Ozato, K. (2013). BRD4 coordinates recruit-
ment of pause release factor P-TEFb and the pausing complex NELF/DSIF to
regulate transcription elongation of interferon-stimulated genes. Mol. Cell.
Biol. 33, 2497–2507.
Perrakis, A., Morris, R., and Lamzin, V.S. (1999). Automated protein model
building combined with iterative structure reﬁnement. Nat. Struct. Biol. 6,
458–463.
Phanstiel, D.H., Boyle, A.P., Araya, C.L., and Snyder, M.P. (2014). Sushi.R:
ﬂexible, quantitative and integrative genomic visualizations for publication-
quality multi-panel ﬁgures. Bioinformatics 30, 2808–2810.
Picaud, S., and Filippakopoulos, P. (2015). SPOTing acetyl-lysine dependent
interactions. Microarrays (Basel) 4, 370–388.
Picaud, S., Wells, C., Felletar, I., Brotherton, D., Martin, S., Savitsky, P., Diez-
Dacal, B., Philpott, M., Bountra, C., Lingard, H., et al. (2013). RVX-208, an
inhibitor of BET transcriptional regulators with selectivity for the second bro-
modomain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110, 19754–19759.
Picaud, S., Leonards, K., Lambert, J.P., Dovey, O., Wells, C., Fedorov, O.,
Monteiro,
O.,
Fujisawa,
T.,
Wang,
C.Y.,
Lingard,
H.,
et
al.
(2016).
Promiscuous targeting of bromodomains by bromosporine identiﬁes BET
proteins as master regulators of primary transcription response in leukemia.
Sci. Adv. 2, e1600760.
Rahman, S., Sowa, M.E., Ottinger, M., Smith, J.A., Shi, Y., Harper, J.W., and
Howley, P.M. (2011). The Brd4 extraterminal domain confers transcription
activation independent of pTEFb by recruiting multiple proteins, including
NSD3. Mol. Cell. Biol. 31, 2641–2652.
Rosenberger, G., Koh, C.C., Guo, T., Rost, H.L., Kouvonen, P., Collins, B.C.,
Heusel, M., Liu, Y., Caron, E., Vichalkovski, A., et al. (2014). A repository of as-
says to quantify 10,000 human proteins by SWATH-MS. Sci Data 1, 140031.
Roukos, V., Burgess, R.C., and Misteli, T. (2014). Generation of cell-based sys-
tems to visualize chromosome damage and translocations in living cells. Nat.
Protoc. 9, 2476–2492.
Sansam, C.G., Pietrzak, K., Majchrzycka, B., Kerlin, M.A., Chen, J., Rankin, S.,
and Sansam, C.L. (2018). A mechanism for epigenetic control of DNA replica-
tion. Genes Dev. 32, 224–229.
Savitsky, P., Bray, J., Cooper, C.D., Marsden, B.D., Mahajan, P., Burgess-
Brown, N.A., and Gileadi, O. (2010). High-throughput production of human
proteins for crystallization: the SGC experience. J. Struct. Biol. 172, 3–13.
Schmidt, D., Wilson, M.D., Spyrou, C., Brown, G.D., Hadﬁeld, J., and Odom,
D.T. (2009). ChIP-seq: Using high-throughput sequencing to discover pro-
tein-DNA interactions. Methods 48, 240–248.
Schuck, P. (2000). Size-distribution analysis of macromolecules by sedimen-
tation velocity ultracentrifugation and lamm equation modeling. Biophys. J.
78, 1606–1619.
Shen, C., Ipsaro, J.J., Shi, J., Milazzo, J.P., Wang, E., Roe, J.S., Suzuki, Y.,
Pappin, D.J., Joshua-Tor, L., and Vakoc, C.R. (2015). NSD3-short is an
adaptor protein that couples BRD4 to the CHD8 chromatin remodeler. Mol.
Cell 60, 847–859.
Shi, J., Whyte, W.A., Zepeda-Mendoza, C.J., Milazzo, J.P., Shen, C., Roe,
J.S., Minder, J.L., Mercan, F., Wang, E., Eckersley-Maslin, M.A., et al.
(2013). Role of SWI/SNF in acute leukemia maintenance and enhancer-medi-
ated Myc regulation. Genes Dev. 27, 2648–2662.
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638, February 7, 2019
637
Shteynberg, D., Deutsch, E.W., Lam, H., Eng, J.K., Sun, Z., Tasman, N.,
Mendoza, L., Moritz, R.L., Aebersold, R., and Nesvizhskii, A.I. (2011).
iProphet: multi-level integrative analysis of shotgun proteomic data improves
peptide and protein identiﬁcation rates and error estimates. Mol. Cell
Proteomics 10, M111.007690.
Shu, S., Lin, C.Y., He, H.H., Witwicki, R.M., Tabassum, D.P., Roberts, J.M.,
Janiszewska, M., Huh, S.J., Liang, Y., Ryan, J., et al. (2016). Response and
resistance to BET bromodomain inhibitors in triple-negative breast cancer.
Nature 529, 413–417.
Sza´ sz, A.M., La´ nczky, A., Nagy, A´ ., Fo¨ rster, S., Hark, K., Green, J.E.,
Boussioutas, A., Busuttil, R., Szabo´ , A., and Gy}orffy, B. (2016). Cross-valida-
tion of survival associated biomarkers in gastric cancer using transcriptomic
data of 1,065 patients. Oncotarget 7, 49322–49333.
Teo, G., Liu, G., Zhang, J., Nesvizhskii, A.I., Gingras, A.C., and Choi, H. (2014).
SAINTexpress: Improvements and additional features in signiﬁcance analysis
of INTeractome software. J. Proteomics 100, 37–43.
Valdez, B.C., Henning, D., So, R.B., Dixon, J., and Dixon, M.J. (2004). The
Treacher Collins syndrome (TCOF1) gene product is involved in ribosomal
DNA gene transcription by interacting with upstream binding factor. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 10709–10714.
Walz, S., Lorenzin, F., Morton, J., Wiese, K.E., von Eyss, B., Herold, S., Rycak,
L., Dumay-Odelot, H., Karim, S., Bartkuhn, M., et al. (2014). Activation and
repression by oncogenic MYC shape tumour-speciﬁc gene expression pro-
ﬁles. Nature 511, 483–487.
Wang, J., Tucholska, M., Knight, J.D., Lambert, J.P., Tate, S., Larsen, B.,
Gingras, A.C., and Bandeira, N. (2015). MSPLIT-DIA: Sensitive peptide identi-
ﬁcation for data-independent acquisition. Nat. Methods 12, 1106–1108.
Winn, M.D., Ballard, C.C., Cowtan, K.D., Dodson, E.J., Emsley, P., Evans,
P.R., Keegan, R.M., Krissinel, E.B., Leslie, A.G., McCoy, A., et al. (2011).
Overview of the CCP4 suite and current developments. Acta Crystallogr.
D Biol. Crystallogr. 67, 235–242.
Youn, J.Y., Dunham, W.H., Hong, S.J., Knight, J.D.R., Bashkurov, M., Chen,
G.I., Bagci, H., Rathod, B., MacLeod, G., Eng, S.W.M., et al. (2018). High-den-
sity proximity mapping reveals the subcellular organization of mRNA-associ-
ated granules and bodies. Mol. Cell 69, 517–532.
Zhang, Q., Zeng, L., Shen, C., Ju, Y., Konuma, T., Zhao, C., Vakoc, C.R., and
Zhou, M.M. (2016). Structural mechanism of transcriptional regulator NSD3
recognition by the ET domain of BRD4. Structure 24, 1201–1208.
Zuber, J., Shi, J., Wang, E., Rappaport, A.R., Herrmann, H., Sison, E.A.,
Magoon, D., Qi, J., Blatt, K., Wunderlich, M., et al. (2011). RNAi screen identiﬁes
Brd4 as a therapeutic target in acute myeloid leukaemia. Nature 478, 524–528.
638
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638, February 7, 2019
STAR+METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Antibodies
Rabbit anti-BRD2
Sigma
HPA042816; RRID: AB_10794766
Rabbit anti-BRD2
Bethyl
A302-583A; RRID: AB_2034829
Mouse anti-BRD3
Abcam
Ab50818; RRID: AB_868478
Rabbit anti-BRD3
Bethyl
A310-859A
Rabbit anti-BRD4
Bethyl
A301-985; RRID: AB_1576498
Rabbit anti-BRD9
Bethyl
A303-781A; RRID: AB_11218396
Mouse anti-FLAG epitope
Sigma
F3165; RRID: AB_259529
Rabbit anti-GFP
Abcam
Ab290; RRID: AB_303395
Rabbit anti-TCOF1
Sigma
HPA038237; RRID: AB_10670660
Mouse anti-Tubulin
DSHB at University of Iowa
E7; RRID: AB_528499
Rabbit anti-Fibrillarin
Cell Signaling Technologies
2639; RRID: AB_2278087
Rabbit anti-cMyc
Cell Signaling Technologies
5605; RRID: AB_1903938
Mouse anti-HSP90a/b
Santa Cruz Biotechnology
Sc-13119; RRID: AB_675659
Rabbit anti-p21 Waf1/Cip1
Cell Signaling Technologies
2946; RRID: AB_2260325
Mouse anti-SMARCC1 (BAF155)
Santa Cruz Biotechnology
Sc-10756; RRID: AB_2191997
Rabbit anti-MBP epitope
New England BioLabs
E8032S
Rabbit anti-Histone H3
Abcam
Ab1791; RRID: AB_302613
Rabbit anti-Histone H4
EMD Millipore
05-858; RRID: AB_390138
Rabbit anti-TP53
Cell Signaling Technologies
2527; RRID: AB_331211
Rabbit anti-RAD50
Cell Signaling Technologies
3427; RRID: AB_2176936
Rabbit anti-CDK9
Cell Signaling Technologies
2316; RRID: AB_2291505
Rabbit anti-CK2a and CK2a’
David Litchﬁeld lab at the
University of Western Ontario
N/A
Rabbit anti-CK2b
David Litchﬁeld lab at the
University of Western Ontario
N/A
Donkey anti-rabbit coupled to HRP
GE Healthcare Life Science
NA934
Sheep anti-Mouse coupled to HRP
GE Healthcare Life Science
NA931; RRID: AB_772210
Streptavidin coupled to HRP
GE Healthcare Life Science
GERPN1231-2ML
Goat anti-rabbit coupled to Alexa Fluor 488
Invitrogen
A11008; RRID: AB_143165
Goat anti-rabbit coupled to Alexa Fluor 555
Invitrogen
A-21428; RRID: AB_141784
Goat anti-mouse coupled to Alexa Fluor 488
Invitrogen
A11001
Goat anti-mouse coupled to Alexa Fluor 555
Invitrogen
A21422; RRID: AB_2535844
His-tag Antibody HPR conjugated
Novagen, distributed by
Merck-Millipore
71841
Bacterial and Virus Strains
E.coli BL21(DE3)R3-pRARE2
Opher Gileadi
Savitsky et al., 2010
Mach1 cells
Invitrogen
C862003
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins
magnetic anti-FLAG M2 beads
Sigma-Aldrich
M8823; RRID:AB_2637089
streptavidin-Sepharose bead
GE Healthcare
17-5113-01
MyOne Streptavidin C1 Dynabeads
Invitrogen
65002
Protease Inhibitor Cocktail
Sigma-Aldrich
P8340
Benzonase
EMD
CA80601-766
(Continued on next page)
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638.e1–e17, February 7, 2019
e1
Continued
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Trypsin
Sigma-Aldrich
T6567
(+) JQ1
ChemPartner, Shanghai China,
http://www.chempartner.com/
Filippakopoulos et al., 2010
(-) JQ1
ChemPartner, Shanghai China,
http://www.chempartner.com/
Filippakopoulos et al., 2010
Dynabeads Protein A for Immunoprecipitation
Invitrogen
10002D
Peptides used for biophysical studies
This study
Table S1E
Critical Commercial Assays
Click-iT RNA Alexa Fluor 594 imaging kit
Molecular Probes
C10330
Deposited Data
Original imaging data (SPOT arrays,
microscopy, and western blots)
presented in this study
This paper; Mendeley Data
https://doi.org/10.17632/xtb4mkvf8f.1
Original imaging data (western blots)
This paper; Mendeley Data
https://doi.org/10.17632/jb4jjxsbb7.1
Original imaging data (Live-cell imaging)
This paper; Mendeley Data
https://dx.doi.org/10.17632/
fzvwgpjx88.1
MS data of BET JQ1 AP-MS time-course
https://massive.ucsd.edu/
ProteoSAFe/static/massive.jsp
MSV000081006
MS data of BRD3 mutant BioID
https://massive.ucsd.edu/
ProteoSAFe/static/massive.jsp
MSV000081001
MS data of BRD9 fragment AP-MS
https://massive.ucsd.edu/
ProteoSAFe/static/massive.jsp
MSV000080981
MS data of rBRD4 domain pull-down dataset
https://massive.ucsd.edu/
ProteoSAFe/static/massive.jsp
MSV000080986
MS data of BET DET AP-MS dataset
https://massive.ucsd.edu/
ProteoSAFe/static/massive.jsp
MSV000080988
MS data of endogenous BET IP-MS HEK293
https://massive.ucsd.edu/
ProteoSAFe/static/massive.jsp
MSV000082857
MS data of endogenous BET IP-MS K562
https://massive.ucsd.edu/
ProteoSAFe/static/massive.jsp
MSV000082859
AP-MS and BioID dataset in searchable
format
https://prohits-web.lunenfeld.ca/
Project 40 (BET rewiring)
Crystal structure of BRD4/BD1 with
an H3 (K9ac/K14ac) peptide
This paper; http://www.pdb.org
PDB: 5NNC
Crystal structure of BRD4/BD1 with
an H3 (K9ac/pS10/K14ac) peptide
This paper; http://www.pdb.org
PDB: 5NND
Crystal structure of BRD4/BD1 with
a TOP2A (K1201ac/K1204ac) peptide
This paper; http://www.pdb.org
PDB: 5NNE
Crystal structure of BRD4/BD1 with
a BAZ1B (K221ac) peptide
This paper; http://www.pdb.org
PDB: 5NNF
Crystal structure of BRD4/BD1 with
an SRPK1 (K585ac) peptide
This paper; http://www.pdb.org
PDB: 5NNG
Crystal structure of BRD4/BD1 with
an ATRX (K1030ac/K1033ac) peptide
This paper; http://www.pdb.org
PDB: 6G0O
Crystal structure of BRD4/BD1 with
an E2F1 (K117ac/K120ac) peptide
This paper; http://www.pdb.org
PDB: 6G0P
Crystal structure of BRD4/BD1 with
a GATA1 (K312ac/K315ac) peptide
This paper; http://www.pdb.org
PDB: 6G0Q
Crystal structure of BRD4/BD1 with
a POL2RA (K775ac/K778ac) peptide
This paper; http://www.pdb.org
PDB: 6G0R
Crystal structure of BRD4/BD1 with
a SIRT7 (K272ac/K275ac) peptide
This paper; http://www.pdb.org
PDB: 6G0S
(Continued on next page)
e2
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638.e1–e17, February 7, 2019
Continued
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Small-angle scattering data and models
of tandem BRD2 BD1/BD2
This paper, https://www.sasbdb.org
SASDCT2
Small-angle scattering data and models
of tandem BRD3 BD1/BD2
This paper, https://www.sasbdb.org
SASDCS2
Small-angle scattering data and models
of tandem BRD4 BD1/BD2
This paper, https://www.sasbdb.org
SASDCR2
Small-angle scattering data and models
of tandem BRDT BD1/BD2
This paper, https://www.sasbdb.org
SASDCU2
ChIP-seq data of BRD3 WT and BRD3
BD(1:2)mut
This paper, https://www.ebi.ac.uk/
arrayexpress
E-MTAB-5670
ChIP-seq data in U2-OS for H3K27ac,
H3K4me3, and H3K4me1
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/
GEO: GSE44672
ChIP-seq of TCOF1 in HeLa
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/
GEO: GSE89420
BRD4 ChIP-seq in mouse embryonic
stem cells (mESCs)
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/
GEO: GSE69140
CHD4 ChIP-seq in mouse embryonic
stem cells (mESCs)
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/
GEO: GSE61188
BRD4 ChIP-seq in mouse leukemic cells
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/
GEO: GSE52279
BRD9 ChIP-seq in mouse leukemic cells
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/
GEO: GSE79360
DNaseI peaks from Encode
http://hgdownload.soe.ucsc.edu/
goldenPath/mm9/encodeDCC/
wgEncodePsuDnase/
wgEncodePsuDnaseG1eS
129ME0PkRep1.
narrowPeak.gz
Encode blacklist regions (hg19)
https://sites.google.com/site/
anshulkundaje/projects/blacklists
hg19/GRCh37
CERES dataset
Meyers et al., 2017
Table S3
RefSeq database (v. 57 (01/30/2013))
NCBI
N/A
Common mass spectrometry contaminants
Max Planck Institute
http://141.61.102.106:8080/share.cgi?
ssid=0f2gfuB
Global Proteome Machine
Beavis, 2006
https://www.thegpm.org/
crap/index.html
BioGRID (version 3.4.157 (01/25/2018))
https://thebiogrid.org/
RRID: SCR_007393
PhosphoSitePlus: Protein Modiﬁcation
Site (June 2016 version)
https://www.phosphosite.org/
RRID: SCR_001837
Uniprot/SwissProt (April 2017 version)
https://www.uniprot.org/
RRID: SCR_002380
Experimental Models: Cell Lines
HEK293 Flp-In T-REx
Invitrogen
R780-07
U-2 OS Flp-In T-REx
Dr. Patrick Meraldi from ETH Zurich
LTRI cell line ID C971
HeLa
ATCC
CCL-2
K562
Mark Minden
CCL-243
Oligonucleotides
ChIP-qPCR primers
This study
Table S1F
ON-TARGETplus siRNA targeting BRD3 (1)
Dharmacon
J-004936-05-0002
ON-TARGETplus siRNA targeting BRD3 (2)
Dharmacon
J-004936-06-0002
ON-TARGETplus siRNA targeting BRD3 (3)
Dharmacon
J-004936-07-0002
ON-TARGETplus siRNA targeting BRD3 (4)
Dharmacon
J-004936-08-0002
ON-TARGETplus siRNA targeting TCOF1 (1)
Dharmacon
J-012550-05-0002
ON-TARGETplus siRNA targeting TCOF1 (2)
Dharmacon
J-012550-06-0002
ON-TARGETplus siRNA targeting TCOF1 (3)
Dharmacon
J-012550-07-0002
ON-TARGETplus siRNA targeting TCOF1 (4)
Dharmacon
J-012550-08-0002
Primers employed for cloning
This study
Table S1D
(Continued on next page)
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638.e1–e17, February 7, 2019
e3
Continued
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Recombinant DNA
pDEST 50 3x-FLAG-pcDNA5-FRT-TO
Lambert et al., 2015
LTRI vector ID V4978
pDEST 50 BirA*-FLAG-pcDNA5-FRT-TO
Lambert et al., 2015
LTRI vector ID V8164
pDEST 50 eGFP-pcDNA5-FRT-TO
Lambert et al., 2015
LTRI vector ID V4874
pDESTpMal_c2x-v2
N/A
LTRI vector ID V8324
Human BRD4 (NP_490597.1) cDNA codon
optimized
FivePrime
N/A
Mouse Brd9 (NP_001019679.2) cDNA
MGC (Mammalian Gene Collection)
LTRI vector ID V7333
Human BRD3 (NP_031397.1) cDNA
Picaud et al., 2013
N/A
Human WHSC1L1 (NP _075447.1) cDNA
MGC (Mammalian Gene Collection)
BC101717; IMAGE ID:8069223
Human ZNF592 (NP_055445.2) cDNA
MGC (Mammalian Gene Collection)
BC112232; IMAGE ID:8327700
pNIC28-Bsa4
Savitsky et al., 2010
N/A
Software and Algorithms
MS data storage and analysis: ProHits (v.4.0)
Liu et al., 2016
http://prohitsms.comProhits_download/
list.php
ProteoWizard (v3.0.4468)
http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net/
N/A
AB SCIEX MS Data Converter (V1.3 beta)
N/A
Mascot (version 2.3.02)
http://www.matrixscience.com
RRID: SCR_014322
Comet (version 2012.02 rev.0)
Eng et al., 2013
http://comet-ms.sourceforge.net/
MS-GFDB (Beta version 1.0072 (6/30/2014))
Kim et al., 2010
N/A
G:Proﬁler
https://biit.cs.ut.ee/gproﬁler/
RRID: SCR_006809
MS Data: Independent Acquisition analysis:
MSPLIT-DIA (v.1.0)
Wang et al., 2015
http://proteomics.ucsd.edu/software-
tools/msplit-dia/
MS data: Signiﬁcance Analysis of
INTeractome analysis (SAINT v.3.3)
Choi et al., 2011
http://saint-apms.sourceforge.net/
MS data visualization: ProHits-Viz
Knight et al., 2017
https://prohits-viz.lunenfeld.ca/
Network visualization: Cytoscape (v.3.5.1)
https://cytoscape.org/
RRID: SCR_003032
Mass Hunter WorkStation Qualitative
Analysis (v.B.06.00)
Agilent Technologies,
Palo Alto, CA
https://www.agilent.com/en/products/
software-informatics/masshunter-suite/
masshunter-qualitative-analysis-gcms
Image analysis: MATLAB scripts
This study
N/A
WebLogo
http://weblogo.berkeley.edu
RRID: SCR_010236
Harmony analysis software (v.4.1)
PerkinElmer
http://www.perkinelmer.com/product/
harmony-4-8-ofﬁce-hh17000001
ImageJ (FiJi v.1.51w)
https://imagej.net/Fiji/Downloads
RRID: SCR_003070
Kodak 1D Scientiﬁc Imaging System (v.3.6.2)
Kodak
N/A
INTAVIS RSi Spotter MultiPep (v.4.0.34)
INTAVIS Bioanalytical Instruments
https://intavis.com/
OriginPro (v.7.5 & v.9.4)
https://www.originlab.com/Origin
RRID: SCR_014212
SEDFIT (v.15.01)
Schuck, 2000
http://www.analyticalultracentrifugation.
com/download.htm
Sednterp (v.1.08)
http://www.jphilo.mailway.com/download.htm
RRID: SCR_016253
MACS2 (v.2.1.0.20151222)
Liu Lab
https://github.com/taoliu/MACS/
Ngs.plot (v.2.6.3)
https://github.com/shenlab-sinai/
ngsplot
RRID: SCR_011795
seqMINER (v.1.3.3)
https://sourceforge.net/projects/
seqminer/
RRID: SCR_013020
softWoRx (v.5.0)
Applied Precision
https://www.bioz.com/search/applied
%20precision%20softworx%20imaging
%20software
deepTools (v.2.0)
https://deeptools.readthedocs.io/en/develop/
RRID: SCR_016366
(Continued on next page)
e4
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638.e1–e17, February 7, 2019
CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to the Lead Contact, Panagis Filippakopoulos
(panagis.ﬁlippakopoulos@sgc.ox.ac.uk).
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Cell Lines
Flp-In T-REx HEK293 cells (female; Invitrogen), Flp-In T-REx U-2 OS (female; P. Meraldi) or HeLa (female; ATCC) cells were
grown in DMEM + 10% FBS (or 5% FBS and 5% calf serum for Flp-In T-REx HEK293 cells) containing penicillin and strepto-
mycin. K562 cells (a kind gift from Mark Minden) were grown in suspension in RPMI + 10% FBS containing penicillin and strep-
tomycin to a concentration of 500,000 cells/mL (in a 175 cm2 ﬂask containing 60 mL of medium). Flp-In T-REx U-2 OS (female;
P. Meraldi) for the chromatin localization assay were grown and maintained in DMEM, with GlutaMAX supplement, supple-
mented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum, 100 U/mL penicillin-streptomycin; clones for the LacO/LacR assay
were grown in 1 mg/mL puromycin. Cells were grown at 37C in 5% (HEK293, HeLa, K562) or 10% (U-2 OS) CO2; parental
stocks are periodically checked for mycoplasma contamination, but have not been independently authenticated. E. coli
BL21(DE3)-R3-pRARE2 cells (a phage-resistant derivative of the BL21(DE3) strain), with a pRARE plasmid encoding rare codon
tRNAs were cultured in 2 3 lysogeny broth (LB) supplemented with 50 mg/mL kanamycin and 34 mg/mL chloramphenicol at
37C. Mach1 cells (Invitrogen, cat# C862003) were cultured in 2 3 lysogeny broth (LB) supplemented with 50 mg/mL kanamycin
at 37C.
Continued
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
GAT
Heger et al., 2013
https://github.com/AndreasHeger/gat
Bedtools (2.26)
Quinlan laboratory
https://bedtools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
Bowtie 2 (v.2.2.3.4.1)
http://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.
net/bowtie2/index.shtml
RRID: SCR_016368
Trimmomatic (v.0.36)
http://www.usadellab.org/cms/?
page=trimmomatic
RRID: SCR_011848
Bwa (v.0.7.8)
Li and Durbin, 2009
http://bio-bwa.sourceforge.net/
RRID:SCR_010910
Sushi (v.1.16.0)
Phanstiel et al., 2014
https://www.bioconductor.org/
packages/release/bioc/html/Sushi.html
SRA toolkit (v.2.9.0)
NCBI
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/
docs/toolkitsoft/
ChromHMM (v.1.17)
Ernst and Kellis, 2012
http://compbio.mit.edu/ChromHMM/
Expasy ProtParam
https://www.expasy.org/tools/protparam.html
RRID: SCR_012880
R Project for Statistical Computing (v.3.5)
https://www.r-project.org/
RRID: SCR_001905
PyMOL, (v.1.8)
https://pymol.org/2/
RRID: SCR_000305
XDS Program Package (built 20180126)
Kabsch, 2010
http://xds.mpimf-heidelberg.mpg.de/;
RRID: SCR_015652
CCP4 Suite (v.6.5 & v.7.0)
Winn et al., 2011
RRID: SCR_007255
ARP/wARP (v.7.0)
Perrakis et al., 1999
http://www.embl-hamburg.de/ARP/
Coot (v.0.8)
https://www2.mrc-lmb.cam.ac.
uk/personal/pemsley/coot/
RRID: SCR_014222
MolProbity (v.3.0)
http://molprobity.biochem.duke.edu/
RRID: SCR_014226
Refmac (v.5.1)
http://www.ccp4.ac.uk/html/refmac5/
description.html
RRID: SCR_014225
DAWN Suite (v.2.10.0)
Basham et al., 2015
https://dawnsci.org/downloads/
ATSAS Suite (v.2.8)
Franke et al., 2017
https://www.embl-hamburg.de/biosaxs/
software.html
ScA˚ tter (v.3.1)
Robert Rambo at the Diamond
Light Source (Didcot, UK)
http://www.bioisis.net/tutorial/9
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638.e1–e17, February 7, 2019
e5
METHOD DETAILS
BET Inhibitors
The thienodiazepines (+)-JQ1 and (-)-JQ1 were synthesized as previously described (Filippakopoulos et al., 2010).
Cloning
Constructs for the genes of interest were generated via Gateway cloning into pDEST 50 33FLAG-pcDNA5-FRT-TO, pDEST 50
eGFP-pcDNA5-FRT-TO or pDEST 50 BirA*-FLAG-pcDNA5-FRT-TO. Details of all entry clones and destination vectors used in this
study can be found in Tables S1A and S1B.
cDNAs encoding human BRD4 (National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) accession number NP_490597.1; ﬁrst
bromodomain (BD1): N44-E168; second bromodomain (BD2): D334-E460; and BRD4 extra-terminal domain (ET): A589-R676)
(from synthetic codon optimized clone (FivePrime)) and mouse Brd9 (NCBI accession number NP_001019679.2, M1-A242) N-termi-
nal region, were ampliﬁed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in the presence of Herculase II fusion DNA polymerase (Agilent
Technologies). PCR products were puriﬁed (QIAquick PCR Puriﬁcation Kit, QIAGEN UK) and further sub-cloned into a pET28-derived
expression vector, pNIC28-Bsa4 using ligation-independent cloning (Savitsky et al., 2010). This vector includes sites for ligation-in-
dependent cloning and a Tobacco Etch Virus (TEV)-cleavable N-terminal His6-tag (extension MHHHHHHSSGVDLGTENLYFQ*SM-).
After digestion with TEV protease, the protein retains an additional serine and methionine on the N terminus. The constructs were
transformed into competent Mach1 cells (Invitrogen, UK) to yield the ﬁnal plasmid DNA.
Mutagenesis
The BRD4/ET mutant (BRD4/ETmut, D650K/E651K/E653K/D655K) was cloned using a two-step PCR. First, the C-terminal part was
ampliﬁed using a long forward primer bearing the mutations and the BRD4/ET reverse primer. The PCR product was then puriﬁed
from an agarose gel and used as a degenerated primer during the ampliﬁcation of the full-length PCR fragment, in combination
with the BRD4/ET forward primer. Mutations which impede binding to a ﬁrst (N116F) or second (N391F) bromodomains were intro-
duced into the full-length BRD3 Gateway entry clone using a 15-cycle QuikChange II PCR protocol (Agilent). Mutations or deletions
which impede binding to the BRD4 ET domain were introduced into full-length BRD9 (Uniprot: Q9H8M2; BRD9mut: K29A/V31A/K33A;
BRD9del: deletion of D18-G36); WHSC1L1 (Uniprot: Q9BZ95; WHSC1L1mut: K154A/L155A/K156A; WHSC1L1del: deletion of V143-
I161); ZNF592 (Uniprot: Q92610; ZNF592mut: K374A/V375A/R376A; ZNF592del: deletion of V364-T379) in Gateway entry clones using
the same QuikChange II protocol.
Cell Line Generation
Bait proteins of interest were stably expressed in Flp-In T-REx HEK293 or Flp-In T-REx U-2 OS cells as described (Lambert et al.,
2014). Parental Flp-In T-REx HEK293 cells, and stable cells expressing BirA*-FLAG fused either to a green ﬂuorescent protein
(GFP) or to a nuclear localization sequence (NLS) were used as negative controls for the BioID experiments and processed in parallel
to the bait proteins. Flp-In T-REx HEK293 cells, expressing NLS-BirA* fused to a FLAG tag were used as negative controls for AP-MS
experiments and were processed in parallel to the bait-expressing cell lines. Stable cell lines were selectively grown in the presence
of 200 mg/mL hygromycin up to 80% conﬂuence before expression was induced via 1 mg/mL tetracycline for 24 h (unless otherwise
indicated) and the cells were harvested. For BioID experiments, two 150-mm plates were induced with tetracycline and treated with
50 mM biotin for 24 h before harvesting. Cells were pelleted at low speed, washed with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and
frozen at 80C until puriﬁcation.
The U-2 OS-LacO cell line was generated using Flp-In T-REx U2-OS cells following a previously described protocol (Roukos et al.,
2014). The LacO array (256x repeats) was digested from the Lac-I-SceI-Tet plasmid (Addgene, #17655) with Xhol. The linearized
LacO array together with a pSELECT-puro plasmid encoding the puromycin resistance gene (Invivogen, cat. no. psetp-mcs) were
co-transfected into U-2 OS cells using FuGENE6 (Promega, cat.# E2692) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. After 48 h of
transfection, cells were re-plated onto a 15 cm tissue culture dish and selected with 1 mg/mL puromycin for 10 d. Individual colonies
of puromycin-resistant clones were grown and maintained in DMEM, with GlutaMAX supplement (cat.# 10566-016, GIBCO), supple-
mented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS, Sigma, cat.# F4135), 100 U/mL penicillin-streptomycin (GIBCO, cat.#
15140122), and 1 mg/mL puromycin (Invivogen, cat.# ant-pr-1). Integration of the LacO array was conﬁrmed by exogenously express-
ing mCherry-LacR-NLS and checking for bright mCherry-dots.
FLAG Afﬁnity Puriﬁcation Using a Chromatin Optimized Protocol
To identify interactions for BET proteins that are either occurring on chromatin, the nucleoplasm or in other locations, we adapted the
chromatin-optimized FLAG AP-MS protocol from (Lambert et al., 2014) with slight modiﬁcations. Essentially, this protocol incorpo-
rates DNA shearing by sonication and nucleases to solubilize protein complexes associated with DNA while largely maintaining pro-
tein-protein interactions. This protocol was initially optimized to enable the solubilisation of histones from cell pellets alongside the
recovery of their interaction partners, including BRD2 and BRD4 (Lambert et al., 2014). These protocols were also tested on the re-
covery of interaction partners for FLAG-tagged BRD2 at the onset of the project, revealing a shift from proteins expected to be soluble
(in the cytosol or nucleoplasm) to proteins known to be associated to chromatin when employing the optimized protocol instead of a
e6
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638.e1–e17, February 7, 2019
more standard AP-MS protocol (data not shown). Stable cells from two 150-mm plates were pelleted, frozen, and lysed in 1.5 mL ice-
cold low salt lysis buffer [50 mM HEPES-NaOH pH 8.0, 100 mM KCl, 2 mM EDTA. 0.1% NP40, and 10% glycerol with 1 mM PMSF,
1 mM DTT and Sigma-Aldrich protease inhibitor cocktail (P8340, 1:500) added immediately prior to processing]. To aid with lysis, the
cells were frozen on dry ice, thawed in a 37C water bath, and returned to ice. The samples were sonicated using a QSONICA 125W
sonicator equipped with 1/8’’ probe at 4C using three 10 s bursts with 2 s pauses at 35% amplitude. Benzonase (100 units) was
added and the lysates were incubated at 4C for 1 h with rotation. The lysates were centrifuged at 20,817 3 g for 20 min at 4C
and the supernatant was added to tubes containing 25 mL of a 50% magnetic anti-FLAG M2 beads (Sigma-Aldrich, M8823) slurry
prewashed in lysis buffer. FLAG immunoprecipitation was allowed to proceed at 4C for 2 h with rotation. Beads were pelleted by
centrifugation (1000 rpm for 1 min) and magnetized, and the unbound lysate was aspirated and kept for analysis. The beads were
demagnetized, washed with 1 mL lysis buffer, and remagnetized to aspirate the wash buffer. The beads were then washed with
1 mL of 20 mM Tris–HCl (pH 8.0) containing 2 mM CaCl2 and any excess wash buffer was removed by centrifuging the beads, magne-
tizing, and pipetting off the remaining liquid. The now-dry magnetic beads were removed from the magnet and resuspended in 7.5 mL
of 20 mM Tris–HCl (pH 8.0) containing 750 ng of trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, T7575) and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37C with
agitation. After the initial incubation, the beads were magnetized and the supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube. Another 250 ng
of trypsin was added to the mixture and further digested, without agitation, for 3–4 h. The sample was acidiﬁed with formic acid to a
ﬁnal concentration of 2% and the tryptic digests were stored at 40C until mass spectrometry analysis.
Endogenous Immunoprecipitation for Mass Spectrometry
Untransfected Flp-In T-REx HEK293 cells (Invitrogen: R780-07 – passage 6) were grown in DMEM + 10% FBS (or 5% FBS and 5%
calf serum) containing penicillin and streptomycin until a conﬂuence of 85% was reached. JQ1 (or DMSO) was added at a ﬁnal con-
centration of 500 nM for 1 h, prior to harvest by scraping and centrifugation. Cell pellets were washed once with ice-cold PBS, and
were stored dry at 80C. K562 cells (a kind gift from Mark Minden) were grown in suspension in RPMI + 10% FBS containing peni-
cillin and streptomycin to a concentration of 500,000 cells/mL (in a 175 cm2 ﬂask containing 60 mL of medium) prior to treatment with
JQ1 as above. Cells were harvested by centrifugation (400 g for 5 min at 4C), rinsed in 1 mL ice-cold PBS, and centrifuged again. The
dry pellets were stored at 80C.
Dry cell pellets were weighed and re-suspended in ice-cold lysis buffer at a 1:4 pellet weight:volume ratio. The lysis buffer contains
50 mM HEPES-NaOH pH 8.0, 100 mM KCl, 2 mM EDTA. 0.1% NP40, and 10% glycerol with 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM DTT and Sigma-
Aldrich protease inhibitor cocktail (P8340, 1:500) added immediately prior to processing. To aid with lysis, the cells were frozen on dry
ice, thawed in a 37C water bath, and nutated for 10 min at 4C before being returned to ice. As for the FLAG AP-MS dataset, the
chromatin optimized protocol from (Lambert et al., 2014) was adopted with minor modiﬁcations to gently solubilize DNA-associated
protein complexes. The samples were sonicated using a QSONICA 125W sonicator equipped with 1/8’’ probe at 4C using three 10 s
bursts with 3 s pauses at 33% amplitude. Benzonase (100 units) was added and the lysates were incubated at 4C for 30 min with
rotation. The lysates were centrifuged at 20,817 3 g for 20 min at 4C.
To prepare beads for immunoprecipitation, antibodies to endogenous BRD2, BRD3 and BRD4 (0.5 mg per immunoprecipitation)
were coupled to pre-washed magnetic beads (Dynabeads Protein A for Immunoprecipitation, Invitrogen; 10 mL of a 50:50% slurry)
for 2 h in PBS on a nutator (at 4C) [Note that the optimal amount of antibody needed for the depletion of the BET proteins from the cell
lysate was assessed by immunoprecipitation coupled to western blot from an HEK293 cell lysate prior to the mass spectrometry
experiment]. Beads washed three times in lysis buffer (500 mL) before they were added to the lysate.
The lysate supernatants were added to the prepared beads (equivalent cell pellet weights were used for each immunoprecipitation
across each cell line). Immunoprecipitations were allowed to proceed at 4C for 4 h with rotation. Beads were pelleted by centrifu-
gation (1000 rpm for 1 min) and magnetized. The beads were demagnetized, washed with 1 mL lysis buffer, and re-magnetized to
aspirate the wash buffer. The beads were then washed with 1 mL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8. The now-dry magnetic
beads were removed from the magnet and re-suspended in 7.5 mL of 20 mM Tris–HCl (pH 8.0) containing 1 mg of trypsin (Sigma-Al-
drich, T7575) and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37C with agitation. After the initial incubation, the beads were magnetized
and the supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube. Another 250 ng of trypsin was added to the mixture and further digested, without
agitation, for 3–4 h. The sample was acidiﬁed with formic acid to a ﬁnal concentration of 2% and the tryptic digests were set to dry
using the speedvac. This was followed by a peptide clean-up using C18 Stage Tips (Thermo, SP301) and then stored at 40C until
mass spectrometry analysis.
Proximity-Dependent Biotinylation Mass Spectrometry
Cell pellets from two 150-mm plates were pelleted, frozen, and thawed in 1.5 mL ice cold RIPA buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl
(pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 0.1% SDS and 0.5% sodium deoxcycholate. PMSF (1 mM), DTT
(1 mM) and Sigma-Aldrich protease inhibitor cocktail (P8340, 1:500) were added immediately before use. The lysates were sonicated
using a QSONICA 125W sonicator equipped with 1/8’’ probe, treated with benzonase and centrifuged as described in the FLAG AP-
MS section. For each sample, 60 mL of streptavidin-Sepharose bead slurry (GE Healthcare, Cat 17-5113-01) was pre-washed three
times with 1 mL of lysis buffer by pelleting the beads with gentle centrifugation and aspirating off the supernatant before adding the
next wash. Biotinylated proteins were captured on pre-washed streptavidin beads for 3 h at 4C with rotation. The beads were gently
pelleted and then washed twice with 1 mL RIPA buffer and three times with 1 mL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0). Following
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638.e1–e17, February 7, 2019
e7
the ﬁnal wash, the beads were pelleted and any excess liquid was aspirated off. Beads were re-suspended in 100 mL of 50 mM
ammonium bicarbonate, and 1 mg of trypsin solution was added. The samples were incubated overnight at 37C with rotation
and then an additional 1 mg of trypsin was added, followed by further incubation for 2–4 h. The beads were pelleted and the super-
natant was transferred to a fresh tube. The beads were rinsed twice with 100 mL HPLC-grade water, and the wash fraction was com-
bined with the supernatant. The peptide solution was acidiﬁed with 50% formic acid to a ﬁnal concentration of 2% and the samples
were placed in a Speedvac to dry. Tryptic peptides were re-suspended in 25 mL 5% formic acid and stored at 80C until mass spec-
trometry analysis.
Recombinant Domain Pull-Downs for Mass Spectrometry
To a frozen HEK293 cell pellet of 2 3 107 cells, 1.5 mL of ice-cold high salt lysis buffer [50 mM HEPES-NaOH (pH 8.0), 500 mM KCl,
2 mM EDTA, 0.1% NP-40, 10% glycerol, 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM dithiothreitol, and Sigma-Aldrich Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (P8340,
1:500)] was added to gently re-suspend the frozen pellet. Samples were subjected to a freeze/thaw cycle on dry ice until completely
frozen (5 to 10 min) and then transferred to a 37C water bath with agitation until only a small amount of ice remained. Samples were
sonicated using a QSONICA 125W sonicator equipped with 1/8’’ probe and treated with benzonase as per the AP-MS protocol. The
resulting samples were centrifuged at 14,000 rpm (20,873 3 g) for 20 min at 4C, and the supernatants were transferred to fresh 2-mL
tubes. Biotinylated recombinant BRD4 fragment [25 mg conjugated to 30 mL of MyOne Streptavidin C1 Dynabeads (65002; Invitrogen,
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc per sample for at least 1 h in PBS) were washed as a pool with lysis buffer. A volume representing the initial
30 mL of beads was subsequently aliquoted for each puriﬁcation and an equal amount of cell lysates was added to each aliquot. The
mixture was incubated for 2 h at 4C with gentle agitation (nutator) with or without competition with 5 nmol of JQ1 (for recombinant
bromodomains only). Beads were pelleted by centrifugation (1000 rpm for 5 s), and tubes were placed on a cold magnetic rack (on
ice) to collect the beads on the side of the tubes. The supernatant was removed slowly with a pipette, and the beads were washed
once with 1 mL of cold lysis buffer containing 500 mM KCl and twice more with 1 mL of cold lysis buffer containing a reduced salt
concentration (100 mM KCl). The beads were then transferred to a fresh 1.7-mL tube using 1 mL of 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and 2 mM
CaCl2. After the last wash, the samples were quickly centrifuged, and the last drops of liquid were removed with a ﬁne pipette. The
samples were re-suspended in 7.5 mL of 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) containing 750 ng of trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, T7575), and the sus-
pension was incubated at 37C with agitation overnight on an angled rotating wheel (15 h). After this ﬁrst incubation, samples were
quickly centrifuged and then magnetized, and the supernatants were transferred to a fresh tube. Another 250 ng of trypsin was added
to the digested proteins [in 2.5 mL of 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0)], and the resulting sample was incubated at 37C for 3–4 h without
agitation. Formic acid was then added to a ﬁnal concentration of 2% (from 50% stock solution) and the samples were stored
at 80C.
Experimental Design for Mass Spectrometry Experiments
For each bait, two biological replicates were processed independently. These were analyzed alongside negative controls in each
batch of samples processed. For AP-MS, cell lines expressing a 33FLAG-GFP tag construct or no bait (i.e., empty cell lines)
were used. For BioID, cell lines expressing a BirA*-FLAG-GFP construct, a BirA*-NLS-FLAG construct or no bait (i.e., empty cell
line) were used. These control cell lines were grown in parallel to those expressing baits and treated in the same manner (24 hr tetra-
cycline induction, etc.). To minimize carry-over issues during liquid chromatography, extensive washes were performed between
each sample (see details for each instrumentation type); and the order of sample acquisition on the mass spectrometer was also
reversed for the second biological replicates to avoid systematic bias.
Preparation of HPLC Columns for Mass Spectrometry
A spray tip was formed on a fused silica capillary column (0.75 mm ID, 350 mm OD) using a laser puller (program = 4; heat = 280, FIL = 0,
VEL = 18, DEL = 200). C18 reversed-phase material in MeOH (10–12 cm; Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 mm; Dr.Maisch HPLC GmbH,
Germany) was packed in the column with a pressure bomb. The column was then equilibrated in buffer A prior to sample loading.
Mass Spectrometry Acquisition Using TripleTOF Mass Spectrometers
Each sample (5 mL) was directly loaded at 400 nL/min onto an equilibrated HPLC column. The peptides were eluted from the column
over a 90 min gradient generated by a NanoLC-Ultra 1D plus (Eksigent, Dublin CA) nano-pump and analyzed on a TripleTOF 5600
instrument (AB SCIEX, Concord, Ontario, Canada). The gradient was delivered at 200 nL/min starting from 2% acetonitrile with 0.1%
formic acid to 35% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid over 90 min followed by a 15 min clean-up at 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic
acid, and a 15 min equilibration period back to 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid, for a total of 120 min. To minimize carryover
between each sample, the analytical column was washed for 3 h by running an alternating sawtooth gradient from 35% acetonitrile
with 0.1% formic acid to 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid, holding each gradient concentration for 5 min. Analytical column and
instrument performance were veriﬁed after each sample by loading 30 fmol bovine serum albumin (BSA) tryptic peptide standard
(Michrom Bioresources Fremont, CA) with 60 fmol a-casein tryptic digest and running a short 30 min gradient. TOF MS calibration
was performed on BSA reference ions before running the next sample to adjust for mass drift and verify peak intensity. The instrument
method was set to data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, which consisted of one 250 ms (ms) MS1 TOF survey scan from
400–1300 Da followed by 20 100 ms MS2 candidate ion scans from 100–2000 Da in high sensitivity mode. Only ions with a charge
e8
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638.e1–e17, February 7, 2019
of 2+ to 4+ that exceeded a threshold of 200 cps were selected for MS2, and former precursors were excluded for 10 s after one
occurrence. For the analysis of the JQ1 time course, half of the sample was analyzed by DDA as above, and the other half was
analyzed (using the same loading and HPLC gradient conditions) by data independent acquisition (SWATH). In that case, acquisition
consisted of one 50 ms MS1 scan followed by 32 3 25 a.m.u. isolation windows covering the mass range of 400–1250 a.m.u. (cycle
time of 3.25 s); an overlap of 1 Da between SWATH was preselected. The collision energy for each window was set independently as
deﬁned by CE = 0.06 3 m/z + 4, where m/z is the center of each window, with a spread of 15 eV performed linearly across the accu-
mulation time.
Mass Spectrometry Acquisition Using LTQ-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometers
Each sample (5 mL) was directly loaded at 400 nL/min onto an equilibrated HPLC column. The peptides were eluted from the column
by a gradient generated by a NanoLC-Ultra 1D plus (Eksigent, Dublin CA) nano-pump and analyzed on a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo
Electron) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon, Thermo Scientiﬁc). The LTQ-Orbitrap Elite instrument under Xca-
libur 2.0 was operated in the data dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and up to 10 subsequent MS/MS acquisi-
tions. Buffer A was 99.9% H2O, 0.1% formic acid; buffer B was 99.9% ACN, 0.1% formic acid. The HPLC gradient program delivered
an acetonitrile gradient over 125 min. For the ﬁrst 20 min, the ﬂow rate was 400 mL/min with 2% B. The ﬂow rate was then reduced to
200 mL/min and the fraction of solvent B increased in a linear fashion to 35% until 95.5 min. Solvent B was then increased to 80% over
5 min and maintained at that level until 107 min. The mobile phase was then reduced to 2% B until the end of the run (125 min). The
parameters for DDA on the mass spectrometer were: 1 centroid MS (mass range 400–2000) followed by MS/MS on the 10 most abun-
dant ions. General parameters were: activation type = CID, isolation width = 1 m/z, normalized collision energy = 35, activation
Q = 0.25, activation time = 10 ms. The minimum threshold was 500, repeat count = 1, repeat duration = 30 s, exclusion size list =
500, exclusion duration = 30 s, exclusion mass width (by mass) = low 0.03, high 0.03.
Data-Dependent Acquisition MS Analysis
Mass spectrometry data were stored, searched, and analyzed using the ProHits laboratory information management system (LIMS)
platform (Liu et al., 2016). Within ProHits, AB SCIEX WIFF ﬁles were ﬁrst converted to an MGF format using WIFF2MGF converter and
to an mzML format using ProteoWizard (v3.0.4468) and the AB SCIEX MS Data Converter (v.1.3 beta). Thermo Fisher scientiﬁc RAW
mass spectrometry ﬁles were converted to mzML and mzXML using ProteoWizard (version 3.0.4468 - http://proteowizard.
sourceforge.net/). The mzML and mzXML ﬁles were then searched using Mascot (version 2.3.02) and Comet (version 2012.02
rev.0). The spectra were searched with the RefSeq database (version 57, January 30th, 2013) acquired from NCBI against a total
of 72,482 human and adenovirus sequences supplemented with common contaminants from the Max Planck Institute (http://141.
61.102.106:8080/share.cgi?ssid=0f2gfuB) and the Global Proteome Machine (GPM; https://www.thegpm.org/crap/index.html).
For TripleTOF 5600 ﬁles, the database parameters were set to search for tryptic cleavages, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites
per peptide with a mass tolerance of 40 ppm for precursors with charges of +2 to +4 and a tolerance of ± 0.15 amu for fragment ions.
For ﬁles analyzed on the Orbitrap Elite, charges of +2, +3 and +4 were allowed and the parent mass tolerance was set at 12 ppm while
the fragment bin tolerance was set at 0.6 amu. Deamidated asparagine and glutamine and oxidized methionine were allowed as var-
iable modiﬁcations. The results from each search engine were analyzed through the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (version 4.6 OCCUPY
rev 3) via the iProphet pipeline (Shteynberg et al., 2011). SAINTexpress version 3.3 (Teo et al., 2014) was used as a statistical tool to
calculate the probability value of each potential protein-protein interaction compared to background contaminants using default
parameters. Unless otherwise speciﬁed, controls were compressed by half, to a minimum of eight, to create ‘‘virtual controls’’
that provide for more stringent background estimation. Two unique peptide ions and a minimum iProphet probability of 0.95 were
required for protein identiﬁcation prior to SAINTexpress.
Data Independent Acquisition Analysis with MSPLIT
DIA MS data were analyzed using MSPLIT-DIA (version 1.0; Wang et al., 2015) implemented in ProHits 4.0 (Liu et al., 2016). To
generate a sample-speciﬁc spectral library for the FLAG AP-MS dataset, peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) from matched DDA
runs (36 runs) were pooled by retaining only the spectrum with the lowest MS-GFDB (Beta version 1.0072 (6/30/2014), Kim et al.,
2010) probability for each unique peptide sequence and precursor charge state, and a peptide-level false discovery rate (FDR) of
1% was enforced using a target-decoy strategy. The MS-GFDB parameters were set to search for tryptic cleavages, allowing no
missed cleavage sites, 1 C13 atom per peptide with a mass tolerance of 50 ppm for precursors with charges of +2 to +4 and a toler-
ance of ± 50 ppm for fragment ions. Peptide length was limited to 8–30 amino acids. Variable modiﬁcations were deamidated aspar-
agine and glutamine and oxidized methionine. The spectra were searched with the NCBI RefSeq database (version 57, January 30th,
2013) against a total of 36,241 human and adenovirus sequences supplemented with common contaminants from the Max Planck
Institute (http://141.61.102.106:8080/share.cgi?ssid=0f2gfuB) and the Global Proteome Machine (GPM; https://www.thegpm.org/
crap/index.html). This spectral library was further enhanced by incorporating non-redundant PSMs from the previously reported
SWATH-Atlas library (Rosenberger et al., 2014) and decoys were appended using the decoy library command built in to MSPLIT,
with a fragment mass tolerance of ± 0.05 Da. The spectral library was then used for protein identiﬁcation by MSPLIT as previously
described (Wang et al., 2015) with peptides identiﬁed by MSPLIT-DIA passing a 1% FDR subsequently matched to genes using
ProHits 4.0 (Liu et al., 2016). The MSPLIT search parameters were as follows: parent mass tolerance of ± 25 Da and fragment
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638.e1–e17, February 7, 2019
e9
mass tolerance of ± 50 ppm. When retention time was available within the spectral library, a cut-off of ± 5 min was applied to spectral
matching as previously described (Wang et al., 2015). For the analysis of the endogenous IP-MS data, a separate library was built
based on the 32 matched DDA runs only using essentially the same parameters as above except that only oxidized methionine
was allowed as a variable modiﬁcation.
MS Data Visualization and Archiving
Functional enrichment analysis was performed using g:Proﬁler (https://biit.cs.ut.ee/gproﬁler/) using the default parameters. Dot plots
and heatmaps were generated using ProHits-viz (https://prohits-viz.lunenfeld.ca; Knight et al., 2015), while Venn diagrams were
generated in R (https://www.r-project.org/). Interaction networks were generated using Cytoscape (https://cytoscape.org/) with
edge thickness based on spectral counts. Individual nodes were manually arranged in physical complexes. All MS ﬁles used in
this study were deposited at MassIVE (https://massive.ucsd.edu/ProteoSAFe/static/massive.jsp) and the scored interactions asso-
ciated with quantitative values are available for searching at prohits-web.lunenfeld.ca (project ‘‘BET rewiring’’). Additional details
(including MassIVE accession numbers and FTP download links) can be found in Table S2O.
Comparison of the Interaction Proteomics Datasets
To assess which fraction of the FLAG AP-MS dataset could be supported by endogenous IP-MS in either the parental HEK293
cells or in K562 cells, the datasets post-SAINT analysis (SAINT analysis was performed individually on each dataset) were
directly compared at a ﬁxed 1% FDR cutoff (excluding the BRDT dataset as BRDT is not expressed in HEK293 or K562 cells).
We note that there were speciﬁc issues affecting each of the endogenous antibodies. The BRD2 antibody seemed to have a
high number of cross-reacting proteins, notably to components of the mTOR amino acid sensing pathway (GATOR2 compo-
nents MIOS, WDR24, WDR59, and SEH1L were all abundantly detected). The BRD3 antibody consistently yielded lower recov-
ery of the bait and interactors, making quantitative comparisons to the other BETs more challenging. The BRD4 antibody was
raised against a portion in the C terminus of the protein responsible to bind to P-TEFb: consistent with this, no P-TEFb was
recovered using this antibody. Since it is not directly possible to compare the recovery of interactors with each BET in this
set-up (or in our opinion to identify new interaction partners solely on the basis of this endogenous IP-MS analysis), we therefore
used the data in aggregate to assess whether they could provide support to the FLAG AP-MS data. Looking at unique proteins
that pass the 1% SAINT FDR cutoff when combining the t = 0 and t = 60 min time points for BRD2, BRD3 and BRD4, we recov-
ered 425 proteins in the FLAG AP-MS dataset while 712 and 776 pass the cutoff in the endogenous HEK293 and K652 datasets,
respectively. Looking at overlaps, the endogenous datasets provide high-conﬁdence validation for 56.2% (i.e., 239 proteins) of
the FLAG AP-MS interactors.
To compare the interactome observed in this study to the one reported by Dawson et al. (Dawson et al., 2011) in the absence of a
statistically deﬁned list of interactors, we ﬁrst queried from their Supplemental Dataset 3 the ‘‘enrichment over reference,’’ and the
‘‘SSM used for quantiﬁcation,’’ where is SSM is the number of spectrum-to-sequence matches for individual biological replicate
that was reported by the authors. Then, the ‘‘enrichment over reference’’ was averaged across biological replicates while the SSM
were summed to provide a dataset that more closely resembled to the analysis we have employed in the current manuscript. The
compiled results of the proteins associated with BET proteins by both studies are now presented in Table S2B. Looking at the
interactors that were enriched by a non-stringent arbitrary cutoff averaged enrichment over reference of R 0.5 (and a minimal
SSM of 2), we ﬁnd evidence for 106 of the 319 interactors reported in our DMSO treated FLAG AP-MS dataset (for BRD2,
BRD3 and BRD4; 33%).
Validation of Interactions by Immunoblotting
To validate selected protein-protein interactions, FLAG afﬁnity puriﬁcation was performed from two 150-mm plates of Flp-In T-REx
HEK293 expressing a BirA*-NLS-FLAG control or 33FLAG-BRD2, BRD3, BRD4 or BRDT treated with 500 nM JQ1 for 0, 10, 60 or
240 min as described above. Following the capture and washing of FLAG-tagged complexes, proteins were eluted directly in
50 mL of Laemmli buffer by incubating the samples at 65C for 10 min. Samples were then centrifuged at 1000 3 g for 15 s and
placed on a magnetic rack. The supernatants were transferred to fresh tubes while avoiding the transfer of any beads. Samples
were further heated at 95C for 5 min to fully denature proteins. For immunoblot analysis, 15 mL (1%) of input samples and 5 mL
(10%) of AP samples were resolved by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (Bio-Rad Criterion Precast Gels, 4%–12% Bis-
Tris, 1.0 mm, from Bio-Rad, CA), transferred to nitrocellulose, and blocked in TBS containing 5 mg/mL non-fat milk and 1% Tween
20 for 1 h at room temperature. Antibodies and the conditions in which they were used can be found in supplementary in the STAR
Methods and in Table S1C. Detection on ﬁlm was performed by chemiluminescence using the LumiGLO reagent (Cell Signaling Tech-
nology; #7003; 1:20).
Interactome and Kac Literature Overlap Analysis
Custom downloads of all interactions for bait proteins were created using the BioGRID version 3.4.157 released on January 25th,
2018 (https://thebiogrid.org/). Bait-prey and prey-bait relationships were both considered in overlap analysis; for BioGRID, only
physical interactions were considered, and no other restriction were placed regarding experimental evidence. The complete acety-
lated lysine database was obtained from the PTMVar dataset (https://www.phosphosite.org/; June 2016 version).
e10
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638.e1–e17, February 7, 2019
Protein Expression and Puriﬁcation
Plasmids were transformed into competent E. coli BL21(DE3)-R3-pRARE2 cells (a phage-resistant derivative of the BL21(DE3)
strain), with a pRARE plasmid encoding rare codon tRNAs. Freshly grown colonies were cultured overnight in 2 3 lysogeny broth
(LB) supplemented with 50 mg/mL kanamycin and 34 mg/mL chloramphenicol at 37C. One liter of pre-warmed terriﬁc broth (TB)
was inoculated with 10 mL of the overnight culture and incubated at 37C. At an optical density at 600 nm (OD600) of 2.5, the culture
was cooled to 18C and expression was induced overnight at 18C with 0.1 mM isopropyl-b-D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG). Cells
were then harvested by centrifugation (8700 3 g, 15 min, 4C) in a Beckman Coulter Avanti J-20 XP centrifuge, and then re-sus-
pended in lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5 at 20C, 500 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol, 1 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP)
and 1:1000 (v/v) Protease Inhibitor Cocktail III (Calbiochem)). Cells were lysed three times at 4C using a Basic Z Model Cell Disrupter
(Constant Systems Ltd, UK) and DNA was removed by precipitation on ice for 30 min with 0.15% (v/v) of polyethyleneimine (PEI).
Lysates were cleared by centrifugation (16,000 3 g for 1 h at 4C, JA 25.50 rotor, on a Beckman Coulter Avanti J-20 XP centrifuge).
Supernatants were applied to nickel-nitrilotiacetic acid agarose columns (Ni-NTA, QIAGEN, 5 mL, equilibrated with 20 mL lysis
buffer). The columns were washed once with 30 mL of lysis buffer, then with 20 mL of lysis buffer containing 30 mM Imidazole. Pro-
teins were eluted using a step gradient of imidazole in lysis buffer (50, 100, 150, 2 3 250 mM imidazole in 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5 at
25C, 500 mM NaCl and 5% glycerol). All fractions were collected and monitored by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (Bio-
Rad Criterion Precast Gels, 4%–12% Bis-Tris, 1.0 mm, from Bio-Rad, CA.). One half of the eluted proteins was treated overnight at
4C with TEV protease to remove the hexa-histidine tag (for crystallography and other biophysical experiments). The other half of the
proteins was kept with the hexa-histidine tag intact for use in SPOT assays. Both tagged and untagged proteins were further puriﬁed
by size exclusion chromatography on a Superdex 75 16/60 HiLoad gel ﬁltration column (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) on an
A¨ ktaPrime plus system (GE/Amersham Biosciences). Recombinant BRD4 and BRD9 domains eluted as single symmetrical mono-
meric peaks. Samples were monitored by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and concentrated to 6–10 mg/mL in gel ﬁltration
buffer (10 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl and 5% glycerol) using Amicon Ultra (EMD Millipore) concentrators with a 10 MWCO
cut-off. Proteins were aliquoted into 100 mL fractions, ﬂash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at 80C until further use. Protein
handling was performed on ice or in a cold room.
Electro-spray Quadrupole Time of Flight Mass Spectrometry
Puriﬁed protein samples were diluted down to 1 mg/mL with 0.1% formic acid and 60 mL was injected on an Agilent 6530 QTOF
(Agilent Technologies - Palo Alto, CA) mass spectrometer with a Zorbax 5 mm 300SB-C3 column (Agilent Technologies - Palo
Alto, CA) to ascertain the correct intact mass of the proteins (15.084 kDa for cleaved BRD4/BD1, 17.549 kDa for BRD4/BD1 with
a hexa-His-tag; 15.036 kDa for the cleaved BRD4/BD2, 17.502 kDa for BRD4/BD2 with a hexa-His-tag; 12.926 kDa for BRD4/ETmut
with hexa-His-tag and 28.370 kDa for the cleaved BRD9 N terminus. Raw ion count data were deconvoluted using the Mass Hunter
WorkStation software, Qualitative Analysis Vs B.06.00 (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA). Theoretical molecular masses of wild-
type and mutant proteins were calculated using Expasy ProtParam (https://us.expasy.org/tools/protparam.html). The correct intact
mass (within 1Da) and purity was conﬁrmed for all recombinant proteins.
SPOT Peptide Assays
Cellulose-bound peptide arrays were prepared using standard Fmoc solid phase peptide synthesis on a MultiPep-RSi-Spotter
(INTAVIS, Ko¨ ln, Germany) according to the SPOT synthesis method provided by the manufacturer, as previously described (Picaud
and Filippakopoulos, 2015). Peptides were synthesized on amino-functionalized cellulose membranes (Whatman Chromatography
paper Grade 1CHR, GE Healthcare Life Sciences #3001-878) and the presence of SPOTed peptides was conﬁrmed by ultraviolet light
(UV, l = 280 nM). The assay was performed using hexa-His-tagged BRD4 recombinant domains (BRD4/BD1, BRD4/BD2, BRD4/ET
and BRD4/ETmut). Proteins bound to peptides were detected using HPR-conjugated anti-His antibody (Novagene, # 71841) and the
Pierce ECL Western Blotting Substrate (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, # 32106). Chemiluminescence was detected with an image reader
(Fujiﬁlm LAS-4000 ver.2.0), typically using an incremental exposure time of 5 min for a total of 80 min (or until saturation was reached, in
the case of very strong signal). The dilution of HPR conjugated anti-His antibody was adapted as a function of the strength of the signal
observed (from 1:5000 for weak binders, to 1:50000 for strong binders) to limit the rapid decay of the emission signal during the chem-
iluminescence detection. Peptide locations on the arrays and their sequences are provided in Table S3.
Discovery of Histone-like Kac-X2-Kac Motifs Recognized by BET BRDs
We previously established that histone H4 peptides carrying two Kac linked by two residues, preferably with a glycine at the ﬁrst po-
sition (for example, SGRG-Kac-GG-Kac-GLG in the H4 K5ac/K8ac sequence), exhibit strong binding toward BET BRDs, with both
Kac binding within the BRD cavity (Filippakopoulos et al., 2012). Furthermore, we hypothesized that ﬂanking sequences contribute to
binding speciﬁcity on the basis of the differentially electrostatically charged rim regions surrounding the central Kac site (Figure S2A).
To further identify potential Kac-XX-Kac binding sites beyond histones, we interrogated all curated protein sequences found in the
Uniprot/SwissProt database (April 2017 version) using custom-made scripts in R (https://www.r-project.org/). We found 43,755
unique sequences in 13,660 proteins, encoding the 400 possible combinations of K-XX-K (where each X can be one of the 20 natu-
rally occurring amino-acids). However, only 2,112 of these peptides contain linkers that are found in the four core histones (we
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638.e1–e17, February 7, 2019
e11
deﬁned ‘‘histone-like’’ linkers as the 13 following XX combinations: GG, GS, DG, AA, AP, AV, AQ, AR, SA, VL, LN, TA, TP). We
synthesized all peptides from this set (2530, including redundant peptides, e.g., those found in splice variants) onto cellulose
SPOT arrays and further added a small set of non-histone-like linked K-XX-K peptides employing a DS linker (213 peptides) as
well as a small set of 91 K-GX-K peptides (from a total of 2521 possible unique K-GX-K sequences, cherry-picking sequences found
in nuclear proteins, transcription factors, and other signaling proteins). Short peptides (15-mers) containing potential Kac sites within
the above sequences were synthesized on cellulose SPOT arrays and screened against the BRD4 BRDs (BD1 and BD2). The results
are summarized in Tables S3C and S3D.
Discovery of Novel Kac Sequences Recognized by BET BRDs
Discovery of motifs containing Kac sequences was performed AP-MS data for each BET protein, with and without 60 min treatment
with the pan-BET BRD inhibitor JQ1, which blocks BRD-initiated Kac dependent interactions. Proteins that were present in the orig-
inal AP-MS set and were lost (log2 fold change % 2) upon 500 nM JQ1 treatment for 60 min were considered as potential Kac-
dependent interactors. Annotated Kac sites reported in the PhosphoSitePlus dataset (https://www.phosphosite.org/; June 2016
version) were identiﬁed using custom made scripts in R (https://www.r-project.org/). 15-aa sequences around central Kac epitopes
arising from this analysis were further analyzed: ﬁrst the percentage of each amino-acid was calculated for each position, relative to
the central Kac, then the relative enrichment (i.e., ‘‘positional enrichment’’) of each amino acid was calculated at each position, taking
into account the total amount of each amino-acid in each set.
From the 124 proteins that were lost from the 3xFLAG-BRD4 AP-MS map following JQ1 treatment (ie those proteins that had no
spectral counts following 60 min JQ1 treatment, Table S2E) 89 contained 456 annotated Kac-sites in PhosphoSitePlus (https://www.
phosphosite.org/). We identiﬁed across these sequences enrichment of His at 3, Phe at 2, Gly at 1, Tyr at +1, Ile or Arg at +2 and
Lys at +3. Motifs carrying two acetylated lysines separated by two amino acid linkers (Kac-XX-Kac, X: any amino-acid) were previ-
ously found to be recognized by BET BRDs (Filippakopoulos et al., 2012; Morinie` re et al., 2009), in agreement with the above analysis,
though the enrichment was modest. The strong enrichment of Kac-Y motifs in our analysis was further characterized structurally and
in solution.
The same analysis yielded 83 proteins (71 of which contain 425 annotated Kac-epitopes) for BRD2, 101 proteins (65 of which
contain 342 annotated Kac-epitopes) for BRD3 and 39 proteins (29 of which contain 114 annotated Kac-epitopes) for BRDT. The
identiﬁed Kac-containing sequences can be found in Tables S3F–S3I.
Extra-Terminal Domain Consensus Motif Discovery
Discovery of potential ET-speciﬁc motifs was performed on the AP-MS data of full-length 33FLAG tagged BETs, following the obser-
vation that several interacting partners exhibited little to no change in spectral counts (within a log2 fold change of ± 2, Table S2E)
following treatment with JQ1 (BRD2: 48; BRD3: 146; BRD4: 67; BRDT: 30). Focusing on BRD4, 12 of its interactors were recapitulated
in a pull-down employing recombinant BRD4/ET domain as bait, including BRD9 and WHSC1. Identiﬁcation of linear motifs within
BRD9 and WHSC1 was performed as shown in Figure 5 and Figure S4 respectively (see also Tables S3K–S3AB). Interrogation of
the full-length sequences of the remaining proteins for motifs similar to those identiﬁed and veriﬁed for BRD9 (LKLVLKV) and
WHSC1 (IKLKI) was performed in R (https://www.r-project.org/) using custom made scripts. First, a minimal combination of both
BRD9 and WHSC1 motifs was constructed ([+]F(F/[+], where F is a hydrophobic residue, including Leu, Ile, Met and Val and [+] a
positively charged residue including Arg and Lys) to extract the maximum number of potential interaction. This uncovered 135 po-
tential sites within the 12 proteins common between FL-BRD4 and BRD4/ET, which were proﬁled on a cellulose SPOT array with
recombinant hexa-His-tagged BRD4/ET (Tables S3P–S3Q). Medium-strong SPOTs (i.e., with an intensity above 65% compared
to multiple hexa-His-controls) were considered potential ‘‘hits’’ and were further proﬁled with SPOT arrays and single amino acid
alanine scanning (i.e., in a given 18-mer, each position, from aa 2 to aa 17, was sequentially mutated to an alanine), and the resulting
17 peptides (1 wild-type and 16 mutated sequences) were proﬁled against the recombinant hexa-his-tagged BRD4/ET domain (Table
S3R). Quantiﬁcation of alanine-scanned membranes allowed us to deﬁne the contribution of each position to binding, with 100%
suggesting no change in binding compared to the wild-type sequence and 0% representing a total loss in binding. Interrogation
of the remaining 55 proteins that had largely invariant spectral counts following 60 min treatment with JQ1 for similar motifs, identiﬁed
344 potential motifs in 51 proteins. SPOT evaluation of these motifs (Table S3S) followed by alanine-scanning of strong ‘‘hits’’ (Tables
S3T and S3U) resulted in a number of similar motifs bound to BRD4/ET. Notably, one of the 12 proteins common between FL-BRD4
and BRD4/ET AP-MS datasets (RPS26) did not yield any binding motif(s). However, a sequence scan of full-length RPS26 by SPOT
array (Figure S4; Table S3V) identiﬁed a peptide region, Residues 31-48) which was recognized by the wild-type but not the mutant
BRD4/ET domain, and alanine scanning of this region highlighted contribution to binding from a BRD9-like motif that included a
phenylalanine residue (KFVIK motif; Figure S4; Table S3W). Interrogation of the 67 relatively unchanged proteins (following 60 min
of JQ1 treatment) for a [+]F(F/[+]) motif (where F now included Phe in addition to Leu, Val, Ile and Met) identiﬁed an additional 93
potential binding sites. SPOT evaluation of these sites followed by alanine scanning of very strong hits (i.e., with intensity > 85%
compared to control peptides) resulted in similar motifs to those identiﬁed for BRD9 and WHSC1 (Tables S3X–S3Z).
Manual sequence alignment using all alanine quantiﬁcations, allowed the assembly of sequences that were used to construct the
ﬁve resulting motifs (BRD9-like: fn-(F/[+])FF(F/[+])-fc; WHSC1/L1-like: fn-F[+]F[+]-fc; CM1: fn-[+]x[+]-fc; CM2: fn-[+](H)-fc; and
e12
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638.e1–e17, February 7, 2019
CM3: fn-[+]-fc) summarized in Table S3AA. LOGOs presented in Figures 5 and S5 were generated using WebLogo (http://weblogo.
berkeley.edu). Identiﬁed and veriﬁed sequences are summarized in Table S3AB. Please note that at the time of submission of
this work, some of the peptide sequences investigated were found to be ‘‘outdated’’ when comparing against the 2018 version of
UniProt – these have been annotated in Tables S3P, S3S, S3X, S3AA, and S3AB.
Custom Peptide Synthesis
Peptides (wild-type or modiﬁed) used in biophysical or crystallographic experiments were synthesized by the TUFTS Core Facility, on
a 0.1 mmol scale with one round of HPLC puriﬁcation. Peptides were re-suspended into water or buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5,
150 mM NaCl) based on their overall charge. All peptide solutions were then further puriﬁed using PD MiniTrap G-10 columns (GE
Healthcare Life sciences) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, to remove any remaining chemical residuals from the synthe-
sis. Peptide details are summarized in Table S1E.
Isothermal Titration Calorimetry
Experiments were performed on an ITC200 titration micro-calorimeter (MicroCal, LLC, GE Healthcare) equipped with a washing
module, with a cell volume of 0.2003 mL and a 40 mL micro-syringe. Experiments were performed at 15C with stirring at
1000 rpm, in ITC buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5 at 25C, 150 mM NaCl). The micro-syringe was loaded with a solution of peptide
sample (1226 - 1433 mM, in ITC buffer) and was carefully inserted into the calorimetric cell which was ﬁlled with protein (0.2 mL,
36 - 59 mM) in ITC buffer. Following baseline equilibration an additional delay of 60 s was applied. All titrations were conducted using
an initial control injection of 0.3 mL followed by 38 identical injections of 1 mL with a duration of 2 s (per injection) and 120 s intervals
between injections. The titration experiments were designed as to ensure complete saturation of the proteins before the ﬁnal injec-
tion. The heat of dilution for the peptides were independent of their concentration and corresponded to the heat observed from the
last injection, following saturation of ligand binding, thus facilitating the estimation of the baseline of each titration from the last in-
jection. The collected data were corrected for peptide heats of dilution (measured in separate experiments by titrating the peptides
into ITC buffer) and deconvoluted using the MicroCal Origin software to yield enthalpies of binding (DH) and binding constants (KB) as
previously described (Filippakopoulos et al., 2012). Thermodynamic parameters were calculated using the basic equation of thermo-
dynamics (DG = DH - TDS = -RTlnKB, where DG, DH and DS are the changes in the free energy, enthalpy, and entropy of binding,
respectively). In all cases a single binding site model, supplied with the MicroCal Origin software package was employed. Heat
capacities (DCp) for H4 (K5ac/K8ac) and SRPK1 (K585acY) peptides were calculated in Origin Pro (v.9.4 OriginLab Corporation)
from the slope of linear least-square ﬁtted DH/T plots. Thermodynamic parameters are listed in Tables S4A and S4B and peptide
sequences are listed in Table S1E.
Sedimentation Velocity Analytical Ultracentrifugation
SV experiments were performed on a Beckman Optima XL-I Analytical Ultracentrifuge (Beckman Instruments, Palo Alto, CA) equip-
ped with an AnTi-50 rotor and cells with double sector centerpieces. Protein samples were studied at a concentration of 50-60 mM in
50 mM HEPES pH 7.5 at 25C, 100 mM NaCl at 4C, employing a rotor speed of 40,000 rpm. Radial absorbance scans were collected
using absorbance optics at 280 nm in continuous scan mode, in 2 min intervals with a redial step size of 0.003 cm. Aliquots (300 mL)
were loaded into the sample channels of double channel 12 mm centerpieces, and 310 mL of buffer was loaded into the reference
channels. Data were analyzed using the SEDFIT (v.15.01b, Schuck, 2000) software package whereby differential sedimentation
coefﬁcient distributions (c(s) distributions) were obtained by direct boundary modeling to Lamm Equation solutions. Sedimentation
coefﬁcients (s) were obtained by integration of individual peaks in the calculated c(s) distributions, after ﬁtting of the frictional ratio
(f/fo), allowing these distributions to be corrected for the effects of diffusion. The software package SEDNTERP (version 1.08) was
used to convert the obtained sedimentation coefﬁcient values to equivalent values in water at 20C, taking into account the solvent
density (1.00802 g/mL), viscosity (1.567 3 102 poise), and partial speciﬁc volume (calculated in Table S4C) of each protein construct
tested. Translational frictional ratios were calculated from the s20,w values using the following equation:

f0
20;w
.
f0

=

Mð1  vr0Þ
.
NAs0
20;w
.
6ph0
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ð3Mv=4pNAÞ
3p

where M is the molecular weight, v is the partial speciﬁc volume, NA is Avogadro’s number and so
w,20 is the sedimentation coefﬁcient
corrected to the standard conditions of density, r0, and viscosity, h0, of water at 20C, and extrapolated to inﬁnite dilution.
ALPHAScreen Assay
The assay was performed as previously described (Filippakopoulos et al., 2010) with minor modiﬁcations from the manufacturer’s
protocol (PerkinElmer, USA). All reagents were diluted in 50 mM HEPES, 250 mM NaCl, 0.1% BSA, pH 7.4 supplemented with
0.05% CHAPS and allowed to equilibrate to room temperature. A 11-point 1:2 serial dilution of the ligands was prepared over the
range of 5 mM – 4.88 nM and 4 mL transferred to a low-volume 384-well plate (ProxiPlateTM-384 Plus, PerkinElmer, USA). BRD4/
BD1 protein and the biotinylated SRPK1 peptide: RKLIVAG-Kac-YSKEFFTKKGDLK(Biotin)-OH (TUFTS, USA) were mixed and
pre-incubated for 30 min at room temperature, before addition of 8 mL of the protein/peptide mix to the plate. The amount of
protein and peptide used was calculated in order to have a ﬁnal concentration BRD4/BD1 and SRPK1 peptide of 1.6 mM and
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638.e1–e17, February 7, 2019
e13
0.8 mM respectively in the 20 mL reaction volume. The plate was sealed and incubated at room temperature for another 30 min before
the addition of 4 mL of streptavidin-coated donor beads (25 mg/mL) and 4 mL nickel chelate acceptor beads (25 mg/mL) under low light
conditions. The plate was foil-sealed to protect the reaction mixture from light, incubated at room temperature for 60 min and read on
a PHERAstar FS plate reader (BMG Labtech, Germany) using an AlphaScreen 680 excitation/570 emission ﬁlter set. IC50 values were
calculated in Origin Pro (v.9.4 OriginLab Corporation) after normalization against corresponding DMSO controls and are given as the
ﬁnal concentration of compound in the 20 mL reaction volume.
Crystallization
The puriﬁed BRD4/BD1 protein buffer was exchanged with 10 mM HEPES pH7.5, 150 mM NaCl and 2% (w/v) glycerol, on an A¨ kta
pure system using a Sephadex 10/300 GL column (GE/Amersham Biosciences). BRD4/BD1 protein (5 - 10 mg/mL) was then incu-
bated on ice for 30 min with 2 - 5 mM ﬁnal peptide. Peptide/protein mixtures were set up for crystallization using a mosquito crys-
tallization robot (TTP Labtech, Royston UK). Coarse screens were typically setup onto Greiner 3-well plates using three different drop
ratios of precipitant to protein per condition (100+50 nL, 75+75 nL and 50+100 nL). Initial hits were optimized using Greiner 1-well
plates and scaling up the drop sizes in steps. All crystallizations were performed using the sitting drop vapor diffusion method at
4C. Crystals of BRD4/BD1 with an E2F1 peptide (H114-PG-Kac-GV-Kac-SPGEKSRY-E129 – Kac-XX-Kac motif) were grown by
mixing 50 nL of the protein (12 mg/mL in 10 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol) with 100 nL of reservoir solution con-
taining 20.0% PEG3350, 10.0% ethylene glycol and 0.2 M NaCHO. Crystals of BRD4/BD1 with a GATA1 peptide (A309-SG-Kac-GK-
Kac-KR-G318-Y – Kac-XX-Kac motif) were grown by mixing 50 nL of the protein (12 mg/mL in 10 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl,
5% glycerol) with 100 nL of reservoir solution containing 30.0% PEG1000 and 0.1 M SPG pH 8.0. Crystals of BRD4/BD1 with an ATRX
peptide (H1027-FP-Kac-GI-Kac-QI-K1036-Y – Kac-XX-Kac motif) were grown by mixing 100 nL of the protein (8 mg/mL in 10 mM
HEPES pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol) with 50 nL of reservoir solution containing 20.0% PEG6000, 10.0% ethylene glycol, 0.1 M
HEPES pH 7.0 and 0.2 M LiCl. Crystals of BRD4/BD1 with a POLR2A peptide (S772-GA-Kac-GS-Kac-IN-I781-Y – Kac-XX-Kac motif)
were grown by mixing 75 nL of the protein (8 mg/mL in 10 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol) with an equal volume of
reservoir solution containing 20.0% PEG6000, 10.0% ethylene glycol, 0.1 M HEPES pH 7.0 and 0.1 M MgCl2. Crystals of BRD4/BD1
with a TOP2A peptide (G1198-KA-Kac-GK-Kac-TQ-M1207-Y – Kac-XX-Kac motif) were grown by mixing 75 nL of the protein
(8 mg/mL in 10 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol) with an equal volume of reservoir solution containing 20.0%
PEG3350, 10.0% ethylene glycol and 0.2 M NaI. Crystals of BRD4/BD1 with an H3 K9ac/K14ac peptide (K4-QTAR-Kac-STGG-
Kac-APRK-Q20-Y – Kac-XXXX-Kac motif) were grown by mixing 50 nL of the protein (10 mg/mL in 10 mM HEPES pH 7.5,
500 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol) with 100 nL of reservoir solution containing 0.20 M LiCl, 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 20.0% PEG 6K and
10.0% ethylene glycol. Crystals of BRD4/BD1 with an H3 K9ac/pS10/K14ac peptide (K4-QTAR-Kac-pS-TGG-Kac-APRK-
Q20-Y – Kac-XXXX-Kac motif) were grown by mixing 75 nL of the protein (9 mg/mL in 10 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 5% glyc-
erol) with 75 nL of reservoir solution containing 0.20 M Na(CH3COO), 0.1 M BTProp pH 7.5, 20.0% PEG 3350 and 10.0% ethylene
glycol. Crystals of BRD4/BD1 with a BAZ1B peptide (F217-LPH-Kac-YDVK-L226 – KacY motif) were grown by mixing 50 nL of the
protein (9 mg/mL in 10 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol) with 100 nL of reservoir solution containing 0.1 M bis-tris-
propane pH 8.5, 0.02 M sodium/potassium phosphate, 20.0% PEG3350 and 10.0% ethylene glycol. Crystals of BRD4/BD1 with
an SRPK1 peptide (V582-AG-Kac-YS-Kac-EF-F591-Y – KacY motif) were grown by mixing 50 nL of the protein (5.3 mg/mL in
10 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol) with 100 nL of reservoir solution containing 0.1 M PCB pH 7.0 and 30.0%
PEG 3350. In all cases crystals appeared within several days from sitting drop plates at 4C.
Data Collection and Structure Determination
Prior to data collection, all crystals were transferred to a solution consisting of the precipitation buffer supplemented with ethylene
glycol and subsequently ﬂash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Data were collected at Diamond Lightsource on beamline I24 at a wavelength
of 0.9686 A˚ (BRD4/BD1 complexes with H3 K9acK14ac, H3 K9ac/pS10/K14ac and POLR2A K775ac/K778ac), beamline I02 at a
wavelength of 0.97949 A˚ (BRD4/BD1 complexes with SRPK1 K585ac/K588ac, ATRX K1030ac/K1033ac and GATA1 K312ac/
K315ac) or beamline I03 at a wavelength of 0.97625 A˚ (BRD4/BD1 complexes with BAZ1B K221ac, TOP2A K1201ac/K1204ac,
E2F1 K117ac/K120ac and SIRT7 K272ac/K275ac). Data processing was carried out using the CCP4 suite (v.6.5 & v.7.0 Winn
et al., 2011). Data were integrated with XDS (Kabsch, 2010) and scaled with SCALA (v.3.3.2) or AIMLESS (v.0.7.3, CCP4 v.7). Initial
phases were calculated by molecular replacement with PHASER (v.2.5, CCP4 v.7) using the known model of BRD4/BD1 (PDB:
2OSS). Automated model building with ARP/wARP (Perrakis et al., 1999) resulted in >90% complete models. Reﬁnement was
performed with REFMAC after several rounds of manual rebuilding with COOT. The quality of the ﬁnal models was validated with
the MOLPROBITY server (http://molprobity.biochem.duke.edu/). Hydrogen atoms were included in late reﬁnement cycles. Data
collection and reﬁnement statistics can be found in Table S5.
Small Angle X-Ray Scattering
SAXS data were collected at Diamond Light Source beamline B21 using an in-line HPLC connected to a Shodex KW404-4F column in
a buffer containing 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 2% glycerol and 0.5 mM TCEP and a ﬂow rate of 0.16 mL/min. Scattering
data were collected in continuous mode and initial data reduction was performed in the DAWN software suite (Basham et al., 2015),
with background subtraction and averaging of 1D proﬁles performed using the ScA˚ tter suite (www.biosis.net). The ATSAS suite
e14
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638.e1–e17, February 7, 2019
(v.2.8, Franke et al., 2017) was used to ﬁrst calculate distance (pair) distribution functions (p(r)) with GNOM, which were subsequently
used as input to DAMMIN for ab initio shape determination. The results from 23 separate DAMMIN runs in fast mode were aligned
using SUPCOMB and an averaged model was created in DAMAVER, which was used as input to a ﬁnal round of shape determination
using DAMMIN in slow mode. The initial DAMMIN models showed low divergence with mean values of normalized spatial discrep-
ancy (NSD) of 0.714 (BRD2), 0.613 (BRD3), 0.619 (BRD4) and 0.619 (BRDT), and the ﬁnal models show good agreement with the data
with c2 values of 1.16 (BRD2), 1.28 (BRD3), 1.05 (BRD4) and 0.92 (BRDT). Docking of the ﬁrst and second bromodomains into the
bead models was performed manually in PyMOL using PDB: 2OUO (BRD4/BD2) with the constraints of the C terminus of the ﬁrst
bromodomain and the N terminus of the second bromodomain pointing toward the center of the molecule.
Confocal Microscopy for Co-localization Using the LacO Array
U-2 OS-LacO cells were transfected with the indicated combinations of plasmids using FuGENE6 according to the manufacturer’s
protocol and incubated for 24 h. Transfected cells were plated into an 8-well imaging chamber (Miltenyi Biotec, cat.# 130-098-273).
After 24 h, cells were ﬁxed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS for 10 min at room temperature. Cells were then washed three
times with PBS and mounted with mounting medium (90% glycerol and 10% 20 mM TRIS-HCl pH 8.0). All images were obtained
using a Zeiss LSM 710 scan-head (Zeiss GmbH, Jena, Germany) coupled to an inverted Zeiss Axio Observer Z1 microscope
equipped with a high-numerical-aperture (N. A. 1.40) 63 3 oil immersion objective (Zeiss GmbH, Jena, Germany). A 488 nm excitation
laser and a 494-555 nm emission ﬁlter were used to detect GFP ﬂuorescence. A 594 nm excitation laser and a 598-700 nm emission
ﬁlter were used to detect mCherry ﬂuorescence.
LacO Array High Content Analysis
U-2 OS-LacO cells were transfected with the indicated combinations of plasmids using FuGENE6 according to the manufacturer’s
protocol and incubated for 24 h. Transfected cells were plated onto a CellCarrier-96 Black plate (PerkinElmer, cat.# 6005558). After
24 h, cells were treated with 1 mg/mL Hoechst 33342 solution (Thermo Fisher, cat.# H3570) for 20 min and were ﬁxed with 4% PFA in
PBS for 10 min at room temperature. Cells were washed three times with PBS and mounted with mounting medium. All images were
obtained with an Operetta high-content imaging system (PerkinElmer) using a 40 3 objective lens. Hoechst, GFP, and mCherry
signals were acquired with a standard ﬁlter set originally equipped with the Operetta instrument. At least 100 ﬁeld images per well
were acquired. Data were analyzed with the ‘‘ﬁnd spots’’ algorithm of Harmony analysis software (version 4.1, PerkinElmer). Numbers
of mCherry dots, GFP dots and co-localized dots in the nuclear (Hoechst positive) region were automatically counted without bias.
Error bars represent the standard deviation from three independent experiments.
Live-Cell Imaging of BET Responses to JQ1 Treatment
U-2 OS cells were seeded onto 8-well LabTek II imaging chambers (ThermoFisher) in complete media with 1 mg/mL tetracycline and
grown for 24 h to allow expression of GFP-tagged protein. Before imaging, the media was replaced with 200 mL of phenol red-free
DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, and 1 3 Glutamax (all Life Technologies). Images stacks were acquired
on an imaging system (DeltaVision Elite, GE Healthcare). Cells were imaged at 37C in 5% CO2 at 60 3 , 1.42NA, with 2 3 2 binning.
Image Z stacks of 24 mm were aquired at 2 mm intervals over 2 - 5 min as indicated. 20 s after the start of data acquisition, 100 mL of
warm media containing 1.5 mM JQ1 was added to each cell chamber manually for a ﬁnal concentration of 500 nM. The exposure time
was 10 ms at 32% for GFP-tagged bait protein. Z stacks were collected, deconvolved using softWoRx (v5.0, Applied Precision) and
displayed as maximum intensity projections (pixel size 0.1075 mm). Images were cropped in ImageJ (National Institutes of Health).
For all quantitatively compared images, identical imaging conditions (including exposure times) were used, and maximum intensity
projections of Z stacks were analyzed.
Immunoﬂuorescence Microscopy of Nucleolar Proteins
HeLa cells were seeded on coverslips at low density in Opti-MEM medium and then transfected with the appropriate siRNA using
Lipofectamine RNAiMAX as per the manufacturer protocol, see STAR Methods and Table S1C for details. 48 hr later, cells were ﬁxed
with 3.7% paraformaldehyde/PBS and permeabilized in 0.3% Triton X-100 in PBS. Mouse anti-BRD3 antibody (1:100; ab50818,
Abcam) and anti-TCOF1 (1:500; HPA038237; Sigma-Aldrich) were used to identify BRD3 and TCOF1, respectively. Proteins were
visualized with goat anti-mouse or anti-rabbit coupled to Alexa Fluor 488 or 555 antibodies (1:1,000; A11001, A11008, A21422,
A21428; Invitrogen). DNA was detected with DAPI staining. Immunoﬂuorescence was observed by confocal microscopy on a Nikon
Eclipse C1si instrument.
Quantitation of Ribosomal RNA by Immunoﬂuorescence
U-2 OS cells were seeded into 12-well plate containing coverslips in complete media with varied level of tetracycline (0, 100 or
1000 ng/mL) and grown for 48 h to allow expression of GFP tagged protein. Cells were then treated or not with 500 nM JQ1 and
then subsequently fed 5-ethyl uridine (5-EU) for 1 h. Cells were then ﬁxed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS for 15 min at
room temperature and then stained for BRD3 and ﬁbrillarin (see Table S1C for antibody details). Nascent RNA was labeled using
the Click-iT RNA Alexa Fluor 594 imaging kit (Catalogue # C10330; Molecular probes, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) as per the supplier’s
instructions. Cells were imaged as above and ribosomal RNA (rRNA) was deﬁned by generating a mask of the 5-EU signal overlap
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638.e1–e17, February 7, 2019
e15
with ﬁbrillarin. For all quantitatively compared images, identical imaging conditions (including exposure times) were used, and
maximum intensity projections of Z stacks were analyzed using custom MATLAB scripts. Cell population intensities were compared
across different treatments using the two-tailed Student’s t test.
ChIP-qPCR
ChIP was performed as described above from 2 3 15 cm plates of U-2 OS cells at 75% conﬂuence following induction with different
concentrations of tetracycline and treatment with 500 nM JQ1 for 1 h as indicated. For each sample, 2% of the resulting eluate
(1/50 mL) was used for each PCR reaction. qRT-PCR was performed using a 7500 Real-time PCR machine (Applied Biosystems;
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) using Power SYBR Green PCR Master Mix, as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Primers used for
qRT-PCR are listed in Table S1C.
Chromatin Immunoprecipitation
Flp-In T-REx U-2 OS cells stably expressing GFP tagged BRD3 WT or a (BD1:2)mut construct were grown in two 15 cm plates to
75% conﬂuence and induced with 1 mg/mL tetracycline for 48 h. Cells were then washed with PBS and crosslinked with 1% form-
aldehyde in PBS for 15 min at room temperature before quenching the reaction with 125 mM glycine in PBS for 5 min at room tem-
perature. Cells were then pelleted and frozen at 80C until ChIP was performed as described previously (Schmidt et al., 2009) using
7 mg of anti-GFP (ab290, Abcam) antibody. Next, ChIP DNA was prepared for Illumina sequencing by blunt-end repair, dA-tailing, and
ligating Illumina adaptors using the NEBNext DNA library preparation kit (NEB, #E6040L). The libraries were PCR ampliﬁed by 16 cy-
cles using multiplexing index primers (NEB, #E7335L), size selected (200-350 bp, PippinPrep 2% gel, Sage Science) and quantiﬁed
with 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent). Input control DNA (220 ng) extracted from sonicated cell lysates of each sample were processed in
parallel. For each library 50 bp reads were sequenced with the HiSeq2500 (Illumina).
ChIP-Seq Data Analysis
For GFP-BRD3 ChIP-seq experiments, 50bp single-end reads were obtained. Fastq ﬁles of other U-2 OS ChIP-seq datasets were
downloaded through ArrayExpress (E-GEOD-44672, Walz et al., 2014). Fastq ﬁles of TCOF1 ChIP-seq and the corresponding input
in HeLa cells were obtained from GSE89420 (Calo et al., 2018). Raw reads were ﬁrst trimmed using Trimmomatic (v.0.36) with default
parameters. As reads from E-GEOD-44672 are only 33bp in length they were not trimmed. Reads were then aligned to the human
genome (hg19) using bwa (v.0.7.8, Li and Durbin, 2009) with default parameters. Uniquely mappable reads and reads that do not
map to the ENCODE hg19 blacklist regions (see Key Resources Table) were used for all downstream analyses. ChIP-seq browser
tracks were generated using BigWig ﬁles that were visualized on the UCSC genome browser.
To analyze protein binding on rDNA regions, reads were mapped to a customized genome where the human rDNA sequences
were added as a separate chromosome on to the human genome fasta ﬁle. Reads that mapped to rDNA were extended to
150bps and their coverage across rDNA regions were generated with the bedtools genomecov function. R package ‘‘Sushi’’
(v.1.16, Phanstiel et al., 2014) was used to visualize ChIP-seq signals on the rDNA region. The rDNA structure is annotated
based off GenBank. Read counts at each position were normalized to total library counts (RPM: reads per million mapped
reads) and normalized input read counts were subtracted. A correlation heatmap was generated based on the Spearman cor-
relations between each pairs of samples on the rDNA region with 1bp resolution. Positions were no reads bind to in all samples
were excluded.
SRA ﬁles of published datasets (BRD4 in mESCs: GSE69140; CHD4 in mESCs: GSE61188; BRD4 in mouse leukemic cells:
GSE52279; BRD9 in mouse leukemic cells: GSE79360) were obtained from NCBI’s Gene Expression Omnibus using the SRA toolkit
(v.2.9.0) and were mapped to the mouse reference genome (mm9) with bowtie2 (v.2.2.3.4.1) using default parameters.
ChIP-Seq Peak Calling
Filtered aligned reads from biological replicates were pooled and used for peak calling. Peak calling was performed using MACS2
(version 2.1.0 20151222) with the parameters ‘‘–broad–broad-cutoff 0.01–fe-cutoff 2.’’
ChIP-Seq Promoter Enrichment
The average ChIP-seq signal of BRD3 WT and BRD3 (BD1:2)mut across all refGene gene bodies were generated using ngs.plot
(v.2.6.3). For the visualization of published datasets for BRD4, CHD4 and BRD9, genome ChIP-seq proﬁles were generated using
bamCoverage from deepTools v.2.0 and heatmaps were generated with computeMatrix/plotHeatmap from deepTools v.2.0 or
ngs.plot.
ChIP-Seq Signal Density Heatmap
Read density of ChIP-seq experiments around peak centers were calculated using seqMINER (v.1.3.3) with reads extended to
150bp. Read counts were averaged for every 50bp for 5kb up/downstream of peak centers. This count matrix was then exported,
processed, and visualized in R (https://www.r-project.org/). For each library, read counts were scaled to 10 million. Next, corre-
sponding input reads were subtracted. Peaks were separated into ‘‘WT only,’’ ‘‘WT and (BD1:2)mut shared’’ and ‘‘(BD1:2)mut only’’
as previously described, and were ranked based on the sum of WT read counts. To compare ChIP signals of different factors,
e16
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638.e1–e17, February 7, 2019
Spearman correlation coefﬁcients were calculate based on the sum of normalized read counts around the center ± 5kb) of each WT
only peak.
Chromatin State Segmentations
Chromatin states were generated using ChromHMM (Ernst and Kellis, 2012) with 10 states included in the model. Merged BRD3 WT
and (BD1:2)mut ChIP-seq reads, as well as ChIP-seq reads of H3K27ac, H3K4me3, and H3K4me1 (obtained from GSE44672) were
used as inputs.
BET Protein Essentiality Analysis in Cancer Cells
Previously reported CERES scores for BRD3, BRD4, PTEN and POLR2A in 342 cancer cell lines (Meyers et al., 2017) were extracted
from the Supplemental data and represented as Violin Plots within R (https://www.r-project.org/).
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Proteomics Quantiﬁcation and Statistical Analysis
Details of the peptide/protein identiﬁcation software and interaction proteomics scoring with the statistical tool SAINTexpress
version 3.3 (Teo et al., 2014) are provided above.
Quantiﬁcation and Statistical Analysis of Microscopy Data
Quantiﬁcation of the different types of ﬂuorescence microscopy images was performed with vendor-speciﬁc software and/or custom
MATLAB scripts and is described in the respective sections. Standard statistical tools (e.g., two-tailed Student’s t test) were used to
evaluate the data.
ChIP-qPCR Quantitation
ChIP-qPCR fold enrichment was ﬁrst computed by performing a background (non-speciﬁc rabbit antibody) deletion and subse-
quently computing the fold increase in signal relative to the background signal. Triplicate measurements were taken for each data
point and error bars represent the standard error of the mean.
ChIP-Seq Peak Overlap
Overlapping of peaks was performed using the bedtools ‘‘intersectBed’’ function. A consensus peak set was ﬁrst generated by merg-
ing overlapping peaks with the ‘‘merge’’ function implemented in bedtools. This consensus peak set was then overlapped with peaks
called in both the BRD3 WT and BRD3 (BD1:2)mut samples and classiﬁed into ‘‘WT only,’’ ‘‘WT and (BD1:2)mut shared’’ and
‘‘(BD1:2)mut only.’’ Signiﬁcance of overlap (p < 106) was tested with GAT (Heger et al., 2013) with 106 permutations, using BRD4
peaks (segments) onto CHD4 or BRD9 peaks (annotation) within open chromatin regions determined as DnaseI sites (workspace)
obtained from the Encode project (see Key Resources Table).
DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
Data Deposition
Crystal structures have been deposited in the Protein Data Bank (http://www.pdb.org), Small-angle scattering data and models in
SASBDB (http://www.sasbdb.org), mass spectrometry data to the ProteomeXchange partner MassIVE (http://massive.ucsd.edu)
and ChIP-seq data at ArrayExpress (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress; accession E-MTAB-5670).
The accession numbers for the mass spectrometry data reported in this paper are MassIVE: MSV000081006, MSV000081001,
MSV000080981, MSV000080986, MSV000080988, MSV000082857, MSV000082859 (https://massive.ucsd.edu). Additional ﬁles
include the complete SAINTexpress outputs for each dataset as well as a ‘‘README’’ ﬁle that describes the dataset composition
and the experimental procedures are associated with each accession number. Accession numbers for the coordinates and structure
factors reported in this paper are PDB (http://www.rscb.org): 5NNC; 5NND; 5NNE; 5NNF; 5NNG; 6G0P; 6G0O; 6G0Q; 6G0R; and
6G0S. Small-angle X-Ray scattering data and models reported in this paper are SASD: SASDCT2; SASDCS2; SASDCR2; SASDCU2
(https://www.sasbdb.org). ChIP-seq data reported in this paper were deposited with as E-MTAB-5670 at ArrayExpress (https://
www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress). All original source ﬁles (SPOT arrays, microscopy images and western blots) have been deposited
to Mendeley Data and are available at https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/ under ascensions xtb4mkvf8f/1, jb4jjxsbb7/1 and
fzvwgpjx88.1.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
The scored interactions associated with quantitative values are available for browsing and searching at https://prohits-web.
lunenfeld.ca (project ‘‘BET rewiring’’).
Molecular Cell 73, 621–638.e1–e17, February 7, 2019
e17
