Gest. Prod., São Carlos, v. 26, n. 3, e4900, 2019
https://doi.org/10.1590/0104-530X4900-19
ISSN 0104-530X (Print)
ISSN 1806-9649 (Online)
Original Article
1/14
Resumo: Como os portos marítimos são elos comuns e cruciais nas cadeias de suprimentos de várias organizações, 
o objetivo deste trabalho foi identificar os riscos que um porto pode oferecer às organizações em sua cadeia 
e como eles são conduzidos por seus gestores. Uma pesquisa exploratória foi realizada utilizando entrevistas 
semiestruturadas com funcionários da empresa que opera o terminal de contêineres e carvão do segundo maior 
porto brasileiro. Os resultados revelaram que não há um processo estruturado de gerenciamento de riscos pela 
administração portuária. Entretanto, várias ações são tomadas como reação às situações de risco. Destaca-se, assim, 
o esclarecimento de tais questões e seus beneficios, contribuindo para a literatura e auxiliando os profissionais na 
estruturação de um processo de gerenciamento de riscos da cadeia de suprimentos.
Palavras-chave: Gerenciamento de riscos em cadeias de suprimentos; Portos marítimos; Logística; SCRM.
Abstract: Since seaports are common and crucial links in the supply chains of several organizations, the objective 
of this work was to identify what risks a port can offer to the organizations in its chain and how they are treated by 
the port’s managers. An exploratory survey was carried out using semi-structured interviews with employees of 
the company that operates the container and coal terminal of the second largest Brazilian port. The results revealed 
there is no structured risk management process by the port administration, but several actions taken revealed concern 
for reaction to risk situations. This highlights the benefits of clarifying the issues, contributing to the literature and 
assisting professionals in structuring a supply chain risk management process.
Keywords: Supply chain risk management; Seaports; Logistics; SCRM.
How to cite: Dias, G. C., Leal Junior, I. C., & Oliveira, U. R. (2019). Supply chain risk management at seaport 
container terminals. Gestão & Produção, 26(3), e4900. https://doi.org/10.1590/0104-530X4900-19
Supply chain risk management at seaport 
container terminals
Gerenciamento de risco da cadeia de suprimentos em terminais 
portuários de contêineres
Gabriela Costa Dias1 
Ilton Curty Leal Junior1 
Ualison Rébula de Oliveira1 
1	Universidade Federal Fluminense – UFF, Rua Desembargador Ellis Hermydio Figueira, 783, CEP 27213-145, Volta Redonda, RJ, 
Brasil, e-mail: gabsdias@hotmail.com; iltoncurty@gmail.com; ualison.oliveira@gmail.com
Received June 5, 2018 - Accepted Oct. 5, 2018
Financial support: We thank CNPq (Process 310825/2017-2 Research Productivity Fellowship Holder-CNPq Brazil) for financial support.
1 Introduction
Since the turn of the century, natural disasters 
(such as hurricanes Sandy and Katrina in the United 
States), economic crises (such as in 2008), terrorist 
attacks and labor strikes have caused large financial 
losses to companies, pointing to the need for better 
risk management of supply chains. For example, 
as described by Tang (2006), Ericsson suffered 
a loss of 400 million euros after a fire shut down 
production of its semiconductor supplier in 2000, 
and Apple was unable to supply various customers 
due to lack of electronic chips after an earthquake 
in Taiwan in 1999 interrupted the production of its 
main supplier. Also, according to Jüttner (2005), a 
strike that closed 29 ports on the West Coast of the 
United States in 2002 caused losses estimated at a 
billion dollars.
Modern supply chain management practices, such 
as Lean Six Sigma, Just in Time and outsourcing, have 
made these chains leaner and more efficient (Wagner 
& Bode, 2008). But the risks of interruptions, as seen 
in the examples mentioned above, have caused firms to 
identify the need for a structured process for managing 
risks of supply shortages, leading to the concept of 
supply chain risk management (SCRM). The threat 
of financial and other losses of these interruptions 
has prompted growing academic interest in SCRM 
since 2004, as shown in Figure 1.
2/14
Dias, G. C. et al.
Gest. Prod., São Carlos, v. 26, n. 3, e4900, 2019
SCRM is therefore a relatively new theme, with 
the first publication dating to 2004. According to 
Ghadge et al. (2012), the evolutoni of research about 
SCRM, as depicted by Figure 1, can be explained 
because it is considered to be a relevant and promising 
field by researchers and management professionals. 
Despite the growth of interest, the great majority of 
studies have been of the applied type, focusing on the 
manufacturing segments such as electronic goods, 
vehicles and food processing. Without detracting 
from the importance of these segments, there is a 
relative lack of research involving SCRM in other 
relevant segments, such as port terminals, where we 
did not find any studies.
Figure 2 depicts a simple example of a supply 
chain that has a port as one of its nodes. Port terminals 
form a crucial link in the supply chains of multiple 
companies simultaneously, and they can be present 
more than once in a single chain (e.g., between 
manufacturer and retailer and again between retailer 
end final consumer). With the growth of seaborne 
transport since the 1980s and its rising importance 
in supply chains, it is important to study SCRM in 
the context of port operations.
Therefore, the objective of this study is to identify 
the risks a port can pose to the organizations of its 
chain and how these risks are treated by managers, 
based on an exploratory study conducted at the Port 
of Sepetiba in the state of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil’s 
second largest port in terms of volume handled.
The paper is organized in five sections including 
this introduction. The second section covers the basic 
theoretical framework of supply chain risk management; 
the third section explains the methodological aspects; 
the fourth presents the results; and the fifth contains 
the final considerations.
2 Theoretical framework
As companies outsource more of their activities 
through a horizontal business model involving 
mutually beneficial partnerships (as opposed to a 
vertical structure), supply chains have taken on new 
importance. Therefore, competition is seen less in 
terms of individual companies and more in terms 
of networks of business relationships (Lambert & 
Cooper, 2000).
The benefits of this movement toward supply chains 
involve, for example, the possibility of focusing on 
a main business (core competencies), reduction of 
transaction and labor costs (with outsourcing) and 
reduced inventory expenses in lean manufacturing 
models (Hallikas et al., 2004; Thun & Hoenig, 2011; 
Blome & Schoenherr, 2011; Tang, 2006). However, 
an upstream or downstream problem in the chain 
could mean a breakdown of the entire process
Because of these characteristics, in particular the 
greater complexity in relation to a single verticalized 
company, where the firm is now seen as a link in 
the supply chain, more attention must be paid to 
managing supply risks than in the past. As framed 
Figure 1. Annual number of publications about SCRM in the Web of Science database. Source: Web of Science (2018).
Figure 2. The port as a link in the supply chain. Source: Authors (2017).
3/14
Supply chain risk management…
Gest. Prod., São Carlos, v. 26, n. 3, e4900, 2019
by Pfohl et al. (2011), the scope of risk management 
of a single company is very different than that of a 
supply chain. This context has led to the emergence 
of supply chain risk management, or SCRM, for the 
purpose of mitigating problems that can hamper the 
supply chain’s smooth operation.
Therefore, in this section we briefly describe the 
key concepts of SCRM, for reference during the 
discussion of the empirical results (section 4) and 
also to enable a better understanding of the theme.
2.1 Supply Chain Management (SCM)
According to Lambert & Cooper (2000), the 
management of the multiple relations along the chain 
of supplies is referred to as supply chain management, 
which offers an opportunity to capture intra- and 
inter-organization synergies, with the overall goal 
of assuring the excellence of the business processes 
and relations with other members of the chain.
Rao & Goldsby (2009) and Blos et al. (2009) 
define supply chain management as the strategic 
and systematic coordination of traditional business 
functions inside and outside a company, with the 
objective of improving the performance of the chain 
as a whole. Boyson (2014) adds that this process 
includes management of production operations and 
other activities, such as marketing, sales, product 
design and finance. Trkman & McCormack (2009) 
propose a broader definition, stating that supply chain 
management (SCM) is a set of multifunctional and 
multidisciplinary activities dealing not only with 
the physical and tangible attributes and activities, 
but also the behavioral and other intangible aspects. 
They also consider it to involve the management of 
relationships and proactive integration among various 
members of the chain.
According to Shu et al. (2014) and Singhal et al. 
(2011), the interest in SCM began in the 1980s. To this, 
Tang (2006) adds that the reason for the emergence of 
this theme can be attributed to the growing trend in 
that decade for companies to outsource their secondary 
functions, including design, logistics and information 
technology, to focus on their core business. Firms 
perceived that this focus on essential functions and 
cooperation with other companies allowed them to 
reduce costs and product development times, while 
increasing quality at the same time. In this respect, 
Boyson (2014) recounts a brief history of the subject, 
stating that the expression was coined by Booz Allen 
Hamilton in 1982. In 1995 the University of Maryland 
conducts a survey among 1,300 firms to understand 
the interest in SCM, not only the internal integration 
initiatives, but also the strategies for integration with 
customers and suppliers. In 1996, the Supply Chain 
Council was formed by 69 companies and developed 
a set of processes called Supply Chain Operations 
Reference (SCOR). In 2002 this council changed 
its name to Council of Supply Chain Management 
Professionals (Lambert & Cooper, 2000).
According to Wu et al. (2013), supply chains need 
to be managed for many reasons, including because 
of their importance in terms of meeting demand, 
their complexity and the numerous events that can 
interfere in one or more of their flows. According to 
Tang (2006), the supply chain deals with five main 
questions: design of the chain; relations with suppliers; 
supplier selection process; allocation of supply orders; 
and supply contracts. Trkman & McCormack (2009) 
indicate that forming an effective supply chain is not 
an easy task in turbulent environments undergoing 
rapid changes. They further state that effective supply 
chain management requires planning to overcome a 
multiplicity of risks, as seen in the preceding section.
Concern over interruption of flows and other risks 
to the chain is not mentioned in the SCM literature, 
and this is the starting point for the discussion of 
supply chain risk management.
2.2 Supply Chain Risk Management 
(SCRM)
Risk management is based on coordinated activities 
to guide and control an organization regarding risks 
(Oliveira et al., 2017). According to Norrman & 
Jansson (2004), a key factor for the reliability and 
good performance of supply chains is the sharing 
of risks and rewards, making the management of 
these risks a relevant aspect for the survival and 
competitiveness of the chains. Thun & Hoenig (2011) 
add that the consequences of ruptures in the chain 
go beyond immediate financial losses and include 
negative impacts on the firm’s image and reputation, 
with consequent loss of demand.
Trkman & McCormack (2009) state that 
SCRM is a field of study that has been gradually 
gaining importance, originating from supply chain 
management, when researchers and practitioners 
turned their attention to the theoretical imperatives 
and professional needs regarding managing the risks 
to which chains are exposed.
Ritchie & Brindley (2007) stress the aspects for 
increased interest in the subject: the strategies and 
structures related to chains are evolving very quickly 
and changing formats in search of competitive 
advantage. In particular, technological changes, 
although generally beneficial, also pose threats to 
established supply chains.
With respect to the relevance of the theme, Xia 
& Chen (2011) consider that SCRM has a strong 
influence on the establishment of cooperation among 
the partners and on the performance of the chain as a 
whole. Hendricks et al. (2009) cite a survey among 
151 executives, of whom 73% stated their firms had 
4/14
Dias, G. C. et al.
Gest. Prod., São Carlos, v. 26, n. 3, e4900, 2019
experienced supply chain disruptions in the past five 
years and 48% expected the risk to increase in the 
next three years. Scannell et al. (2013) conclude that 
a risk-oriented supply chain enables firms to obtain 
strong competitive advantage and provides reliable 
long-term benefits for all stakeholders.
In the literature it is possible to find a number of 
reasons and tendencies in the business world that 
increase the vulnerability of supply chains:
•	 Opportunities to compete globally increase 
the chain’s exposure to risks and add new risk 
dimensions: Thun & Hoenig (2011) state that 
firms are required by current trends to think about 
global markets, both in terms of consumers and 
suppliers. Despite the opportunities for higher 
revenues and reduced costs, this increases the 
complexity of chains and hence their vulnerability 
to risks and the difficulty of managing them;
•	 Interdependence among the members is growing 
steadily: Hallikas et al. (2004) argue that 
partnerships are a key factor for companies, 
by which they can reduce transaction costs, 
concentrate on core activities, and have easier 
access to technology and information. However, 
they point out the risks of this interdependence, 
such as resistance to change, discord over practices 
among the members and relationship conflicts;
•	 The size and complexity of chains bring risks 
like lack of trust, information asymmetry, 
dependence on outsourcing and inflexibility 
of standardized contracts;
•	 Outsourcing can go too far: Tang (2006) and 
Thun & Hoenig (2011) state that outsourcing 
makes firms increasingly interdependent, making 
it harder to control their own fate. As seen 
previously, accidents and other risks suffered by 
suppliers can cause direct losses to downstream 
companies. The authors cite the example of Land 
Rover, which in 2001 had to spend millions of 
dollars to avoid a production shutdown for nine 
months and the layoff of 1,500 workers caused 
by the bankruptcy of a supplier;
•	 Theories such as Six Sigma and Just in Time 
can pose problems when put into practice: 
According to Norrman & Jansson (2004) and 
Thun & Hoenig (2011), while these theories 
promise greater efficiency and competitiveness 
and confer a measure of status on adopters, 
they also make supply chains more vulnerable. 
As noted by Pfohl et al. (2010), the small stocks 
of raw materials, parts and/or finished products 
means that any disruption in the supply chain 
can jeopardize the manufacturer’s ability to 
supply customers, and hence its reputation for 
reliability in the market;
•	 Natural and/or man-made disasters can disrupt 
supply chains: The focus of risk management is 
to try to avoid or soften the effects of disasters 
or ruptures in the flows in the chain. Examples 
are the damage done to crops by Hurricane 
Floyd in North Carolina (USA) in 1999, which 
interrupted supply of key foodstuffs for seven 
days, and a fire in 1997 that forced Toyota to 
close 18 factories for two weeks, which cost 
US$ 195 million in direct costs for supply chain 
adjustments and US$ 325 million in lost vehicle 
sales (Norrman & Jansson, 2004).
According to Wieland & Wallenburg (2012), effective 
SCRM involves both managing the routine risks to 
which chains are exposed as well as the extraordinary 
ones, such as natural disasters and major accidents, 
as mentioned above. Furthermore, this management 
should be both reactive (monitoring changes in the 
chain, needs of customers, technological advances 
and competitors), to enable rapid response to adverse 
events, and proactive (identifying potential risks 
and implementing actions to prevent or minimize 
the impacts)
Lavastre et al. (2012) bring a different perspective, 
stating that SCRM implies an evaluation, over short- and 
long-term strategic and operational horizons, of the 
risks that can affect the flows of information, materials 
and financial resources, and is centered on the ability 
to identify risks in advance or the agility to react to 
them to diminish the adverse effects.
In turn Trkman & McCormack (2009) mention the 
identification, evaluation and analysis of the areas of 
vulnerability and risk in supply chains. Both Rao & 
Goldsby (2009) and Manuj et al. (2014) review the 
literature to summarize concepts of SCRM, finding 
that the objectives are to reduce vulnerabilities and 
apply risk management tools in collaboration with 
the other members of the chain to deal with risks and 
uncertainties. The objective can also be described as 
identifying potential sources of risk and implementing 
suitable actions to avoid or contain the chain’s 
vulnerability. Manuj & Mentzer (2008), in studying 
risk management in global supply chains, add that 
the objective also can be to reduce the probability or 
velocity of adverse events or the time to detect these 
events, for the overall purpose of limiting losses.
A consensus exists among many authors (Trkman 
& McCormack, 2009; Hallikas et al., 2004; Tuncel 
5/14
Supply chain risk management…
Gest. Prod., São Carlos, v. 26, n. 3, e4900, 2019
& Alpan, 2010; Kern et al., 2012) that the basic risk 
management process consists of:
•	 Identification: This step allows decision-makers to 
learn about the events and phenomena that cause 
uncertainty, with the main goal of recognizing 
future risks so that the organization can manage 
them proactively (Hallikas et al., 2004);
•	 Evaluation: The risks previously identified 
are prioritized, generally by comparing the 
severity of their consequences and probability 
of occurrence, to define the actions that will be 
taken (Hallikas et al., 2004; Shi, 2004);
•	 Mitigation: This step depends directly on the 
previous ones, which will indicate the actions 
to be taken in response to specific risks. 
The mitigation strategies can be to transfer risk, 
to assume it as an individual responsibility, 
eliminate or reduce it, or analyze it again 
(Hallikas et al., 2004);
•	 Control: Neither the organization nor the 
environment is static. They are constantly 
changing, as are the risks, so they must be 
constantly monitored. The objective is to detect 
trends for increased likelihood of occurrence 
or severity of impact (Hallikas et al., 2004).
2.3 Seaports and SCRM
Ports are strategic elements for global economic 
growth, especially by handling containers, which 
now account for a large portion of seaborne cargo 
due to the greater agility and reduced logistics costs 
they enable, thus enhancing interface of international 
markets. There can be no question that ports play a 
leading role in global logistics, by handling inbound 
and outbound cargo and aggregating value through 
their various services (Figueiredo, 2000).
Xiao et al. (2015) also stress the importance of 
ports in international trade and the global economy, 
specifically mentioning the economic and social 
importance of the various elements of port infrastructure, 
such as the warehouses and terminals that compose 
modern multimodal systems.
According to Monié & Vidal (2006), the evolution 
of maritime transport toward greater focus on 
containerization has caused ports to change in many 
aspects within the dominant logic of competitiveness, 
whereby the need for differentiation in relation to 
competitors has required reformulations to reduce 
operational costs and raise productivity.
The intensification of globalization as of the 
1990s has been marked by expanding production, 
consumption and circulation of goods on all scales. 
Companies have developed new growth strategies to 
preserve their profit margins, by searching for new 
markets for diffusion of their products, especially in 
emerging countries of Asia and Latin America where 
consolidated consumption niches already exist. This 
has transformed the global economy and increased 
the importance of the international seaport system. 
Over this period, the evolution and modernization of 
seaborne trade has gone hand-in-hand with increased 
cargo capacity and handling speed (Monié & Vidal, 
2006).
Another standout feature of globalization is 
outsourcing of production and relocation of factories, 
especially in sectors with low to medium technological 
needs, to regions that offer lower production costs 
and good accessibility to infrastructure, with China 
being the leading example. The multiple location 
of production and assembly has surged ahead as 
a business strategy, and maritime transport is the 
tool that enables this strategy to operate (Monié & 
Vidal, 2006).
According to Velasco & Lima (1998), the operation 
of the main Brazilian ports, originally each under the 
control of a local government-owned port authority 
(called a “Companhia Docas”), was largely privatized 
in the 1990s by concession, lease or authorization under 
a monopoly regime. This is the case of the Port of 
Sepetiba (The port takes its name from the bay where 
it is located. Its official name was changed in 2006 
to the Port of Itaguaí, after the municipality within 
the bay were it is located), the focus of this study.
Tovar & Ferreira (2006) present a brief history of 
Brazil’s port structure. Until the 1990s, the national port 
system was composed of ports administered directly 
by the federal government though a holding company 
called Portobrás (Empresa de Portos do Brasil S.A.), 
which in turn delegated management of each port to a 
local port authority (Companhia Docas) as well as to 
private concessionaires and state government agencies 
in some cases. With the extinction of Portobrás in 
March 1990, the process of decentralization of the 
port structure (consisting of 36 ports at the time) 
started. In the particular case of the state of Rio de 
Janeiro, this was accompanied by the absorption of 
the National Institute of Waterway Research (Instituto 
Nacional de Pesquisa Hidroviária - INPH) and the 
Brazilian Dredging Company (Companhia Brasileira 
de Dragagem - CBD) into Companhia Docas do Rio 
de Janeiro.
Further according to those authors, the next step 
was the enactment in 1993 of Law 8,630, known 
as the Port Modernization Law, establishing a new 
legal framework for the sector, aiming to promote 
competition between terminals, especially through 
privatization of operation of ports to allow participation 
of pre-qualified private entities. This attracted a good 
6/14
Dias, G. C. et al.
Gest. Prod., São Carlos, v. 26, n. 3, e4900, 2019
deal of interest from private investors due to the 
potential profitability of port operations against the 
backdrop of growing international commerce. Under 
this framework, ports can be operated through three 
legal mechanisms:
•	 Concession, through a long-term contract 
awarded by international tender. At the end of 
the concession, the contract can be renewed 
or the assets will revert to the government for 
concession to another operator;
•	 Lease of port areas and installations. In this 
case the operation of port activities is also 
awarded through an auction or other tender 
process, except when the lessee already holds 
useful domain of the area, in which case all that 
is needed is authorization from the National 
Waterway Transportation Agency (ANTAQ);
•	 Private port operator qualification and acting: 
this is achieved through an administrative act 
from port authority, to compliance with the 
norms, qualification and provision of cargo 
handling services, performed exclusively by 
private operators.
According to Lacerda (2005), the transfer of 
responsibility for operating ports to the private sector 
is a trend observed in many countries, in particular to 
enable investments in modernization and expansion 
of capacity and to reduce handling costs (which can 
decline by up to 50% both for containers and dry 
bulk cargo).
With respect to supply chain risk management 
of ports, very few articles have been published, and 
to the best of our knowledge none with focus on a 
Brazilian port.
Xiao et al. (2015) developed an integrated model that 
incorporates the risks of natural disasters in investments 
in port infrastructure, in particular the increasing risk 
of economic and social losses from such disasters 
due to global climate change. The authors believe 
that the risks of natural disasters can lead to political 
instability and damage to transportation infrastructure, 
especially seaports, and propose an analytical model 
of investments in port infrastructure to allow reducing 
these damages by response mechanisms. In their 
bibliographical discussion, they indicate the lack of 
references on risk management of the link in supply 
chains represented by ports.
In turn, Fan et al. (2015) performed a study of the 
risk focused on container transport. They state that 
many factors, such as increased demand for goods 
in general, expansion of routes and ship sizes and 
need for speed combine to pose risks for this type of 
transport. Thus, they propose an analysis focused on 
an American port and its container terminal, given 
the volatility of demand.
In the Brazilian case, despite the significant 
improvements resulting from the privatization 
program, discussed briefly above, ports still suffer 
from many problems, with the main bottlenecks being 
long lines for trucks to enter port facilities and lack 
of proper dredging. These aspects are emblematic 
of the shortfall of the country’s port installations in 
relation to many other countries, even though Brazil 
has the world’s one of the 10 biggest economies in 
the world. According to Tovar & Ferreira (2006), the 
efficiency of ports is intimately connected to economic 
development, on which count the Brazilian port 
system needs to improve its infrastructure to allow 
the country to reach its full foreign trade potential.
3 Method
3.1 Methodological procedures
We conducted an exploratory case study in the field. 
The data collection instrument was semi-structured 
interviews, with a questionnaire composed of 
quantitative and qualitative questions.
According to Gerhardt & Silveira (2009), one of 
the steps for data collection is to pretest the instrument 
employed. Therefore, we carried out a pilot test of 
our questionnaire with two specialists in the logistics 
area of Fluminense Federal University (UFF) in Rio 
de Janeiro, to obtain their feedback.
The taxonomy of risks, with the division used 
for the quantitative part, was based on the SCRM 
literature, as indicated in Table 1.
Besides this, the questionnaire contained open-ended 
questions to base discussions, whose responses are 
reflected in the results presented.
The interviews were conducted in person, and 
the field study also involved a guided tour of the 
port facilities, where the respondents could show 
the interfaces of their work and the justifications for 
their responses.
Other data were collected from documents made 
available by the company, covering the structure, 
location and market positioning of the port in relation 
to other Brazilian ports, besides specific information 
on the types of activities of the port and the container 
terminal.
The script for analyzing the date followed that 
employed by Gerhardt & Silveira (2009), as indicated 
below:
•	 Establishment of categories;
•	 Codification and tabulation;
•	 Content analysis.
7/14
Supply chain risk management…
Gest. Prod., São Carlos, v. 26, n. 3, e4900, 2019
The categories determined for segregation of the data 
were the types of risks described in Table 1, besides 
various other themes that were mentioned by the 
respondents. For the second step, of codification and 
tabulation, the interviews were transcribed completely 
and the comments were tabulated according to the 
categories. Finally, the content analysis involved 
systematization of the responses, for aggregation of 
data and objective inferences.
3.2 Port of Sepetiba
CSN Tecon is a company of the CSN Group 
(Companhia Siderúrgica Nacional, engaged principally 
in steelmaking) that holds a 25-year lease with 
Companhia Docas do Rio de Janeiro to operate the 
container terminal at the Port of Sepetiba (“Tecon” 
stands for “terminal de conteineres”). According to 
the interview conducted, a 25 years contract was 
originally signed in 1998 and negotiations are under 
way for its renewal, to Tecon and Tecar (coal terminal, 
that has the same contract type and belongs to CSN 
Group as well).
The lease agreement was signed in 1998, but 
operations only began in 2001. The company that 
operates the ore terminal, CPBS Vale, is a subsidiary 
of mining giant Vale.
The Port of Sepetiba is strategically located to 
serve companies in the states of Rio de Janeiro and 
São Paulo, the two largest contributors to Brazilian 
GDP. In terms of intermodality, the port is served by 
a railway and highways.
According to data from the National Waterway 
Transportation Agency (ANTAQ) for 2014, the Port 
of Sepetiba is the country’s second largest in terms of 
volume handled, with 18.14% of the nation’s total, 
only behind the Port of Santos, with 26%. Figure 3 
below illustrates the port’s structure.
3.3 Characteristics of the interviewees
We conducted two in-depth interviews: one with 
a port management specialist working for CSN, the 
parent company of the operators of the container 
terminal and coal terminal, who has graduate training 
in port management and experience abroad at the 
Port of Barcelona in Spain, and an employee of the 
supply sector of CSN, to obtain information of an 
internal and external nature.
As indicated, both respondents are employees 
of Companhia Siderúrgica Nacional (CSN), which 
through its subsidiaries operates the container terminal 
and the coal terminal in the Port of Sepetiba. The port 
operations specialist will be identified as “S” and the 
supply analyst as “A”.
It should be mentioned that although both respondents 
are assigned to the same department, their activities 
are not interconnected. The port operations specialist 
was designated by the development manager as 
someone with knowledge to answer all questions 
regarding the study based on his experience within 
the Port of Sepetiba and also for having worked 
abroad. The specialist then suggested interviewing 
the supply analyst, as someone with more intrinsic 
knowledge of the internal operations and supply 
chain of the port.
The information on the profiles of the respondents 
is presented in Table 2.
Table 1. Risk taxonomy utilized in the study.
Risks
Description
Authors
Supply
Any risk of interruption of the flow between a 
company and supplier that prevents the supplier from 
satisfying its commitment to reliability.
Diabat et al. (2012), Pfohl et al. (2010), 
Scannell et al. (2013).
Environmental
Risks beyond the supply chain, such as economic 
crises, strikes, regulatory/legislative changes that 
influence the flows in the chain.
Pfohl et al. (2010), Jüttner (2005).
Demand
Risks inherent to supply and demand, including 
availability of stocks, adequate management of new 
products, variations in demand, etc.
Manuj & Mentzer (2008), Ghadge et al. 
(2012), Diabat et al. (2012).
Discrete
Exogenous events to the chain, normal not foreseeable 
and with negative consequences, such as terrorist 
attacks, contagious diseases and natural disasters.
Trkman & McCormack (2009).
Operational
Risks such as operational/technical failures, 
productive losses and technological changes in 
products and machinery.
Diabat et al. (2012), Manuj & Mentzer 
(2008), Tang (2006), Shi (2004).
Rupture
Disturbances caused by natural disasters and/or 
human actions, caused by a single factor or series of 
factors.
Tang (2006), Shu et al. (2014).
Source: Authors (2017).
8/14
Dias, G. C. et al.
Gest. Prod., São Carlos, v. 26, n. 3, e4900, 2019
4 Presentation and discussion of the 
results
At the start of the interviews, the respondents were 
asked about the situations of risk they had personally 
experienced in their positions. Employee “S” stated 
that some risks had materialized, while “A” stated 
no. On being asked if they had knowledge of risk 
management actions of the company, both responded 
negatively.
Table 3 presents the answers of the respondents to 
the questionnaire. The sources or risk were divided 
into the categories “Supply”, “Environmental”, 
“Discrete”, “Demand”, “Operational”, “Rupture” and 
“Others” (in the last case described at the initiative 
of the respondents). For each source of risk they 
were asked about the observed frequency and gravity 
of the impact on the supply chain, on a scale from 
1 to 5 where: 5- Critical; 4- High; 3- Moderate; 
2- Low; and 1- Negligible. They were also question 
about whether the risk could be avoided.
During the interviews, with the help of the 
questionnaire, it was possible to identify some inherent 
risks of port operational activity that can have a direct 
impact on the entire supply chain:
•	 For supply risks, the company has a policy for 
minimization: procurement contracts worth 
more than R$ 500 thousand are only signed 
with pre-qualified companies through a tender 
procedure, according to lowest price. For internal 
requisitions (scope of employee “A”), there is a 
specific requisition form, under the responsibility 
of all areas, requiring filling in all necessary 
information, to avoid errors as to quantity and 
specification. Employee “A” stressed that delivery 
delays mainly involve imported materials. 
Employee “S” explained that the port is a source 
of delay in deliveries to its clients, because the 
importation process depends on many factors, 
such as customs procedures. There are three 
channels for scrutiny of imported shipments by 
the customs authorities: green, when the goods 
are unloaded and cleared without any type of 
Figure 3. Structure of the Port of Sepetiba. Source: Document provided by the company (2017).
Table 2. Profiles of the participants.
Employee “S”
Employee “A”
Schooling Level
Master’s Degree
Bachelor’s Degree
Time with the Company
5.5 years
7 years
Department
Port Operations
Port Operations
Position
Port Operations Specialist
Supply Analyst
Time in the Position
5.5 years
6 years
Source: Authors (2017).
9/14
Supply chain risk management…
Gest. Prod., São Carlos, v. 26, n. 3, e4900, 2019
Table 3. Response of the employees to the questionnaire.
Employee E
Employee A
Frequency
Gravity
Could it have 
been avoided?
Frequency
Gravity
Could it 
have been 
avoided?
Supply
Delayed delivery
Monthly
NA
Yes
Quarterly
5
Yes
Product outside specifications
Semiannually
4
Yes
Semiannually
5
Yes
Altered quantity
Semiannually
2
Yes
Semiannually
3
Yes
Environmental
Economic crises
More than annually
4
No
Annually
5
Yes
Strikes
Annually
4
No
Never occurred
NA
NA
Legal/regulatory changes
Weekly
1 to 5
No
Semiannually
1
No
Discrete
Terrorist attacks
Never occurred
5
No
Never occurred
NA
No
Contagious diseases
More than annually
5
Yes
Never occurred
NA
Yes
Natural disasters
Never occurred
5
No
Never occurred
NA
No
Demand
Variations in demand
Twice monthly
5
No
Semiannually
5
Yes
Inventory shortages
Annually
5
Yes
Monthly
5
Yes
Operational
Technical failures
Daily
1 to 5
Yes
Monthly
3
Yes
Losses in the process
Quarterly
5
Yes
Weekly
5
Yes
Alterations in production
Weekly
2 to 3
Yes
NA
NA
NA
Technological changes
Annually
5
Yes
NA
NA
NA
Breakdown of equipment
Weekly
5
Yes
Weekly
5
Yes
Rupture
Supplier failed to deliver material
Semiannually
5
Yes
Semiannually
5
Yes
Lack of exchange of information along the chain
Annually
5
Yes
Weekly
5
Yes
Others
Work-related accidents
More than annually
5
Yes
Environmental (e.g., threats to a rare dolphin 
species, oil leaks, silting)
Never occurred
5
Yes
Access of supplier to the port installations
Semiannually
5
Yes
Failure of a system or network
Weekly
5
Yes
Location far from the urban center
Semiannually
5
Yes
NA = Not Applicable. Source: Authors (2017).
10/14
Dias, G. C. et al.
Gest. Prod., São Carlos, v. 26, n. 3, e4900, 2019
inspection; yellow, where the documents are 
checked for correct description and quantity 
of products, along with other information; and 
red, when both the documents and goods are 
inspected. When containers are routed through 
the red channel, they must be opened, which 
delays delivery and can lead to problems of 
clearance due to the involvement of other 
authorities. To mitigate this risk, the terminal 
operator has a sector that instructs all clients 
about the legal procedures for importation and 
exportation, to avoid clearance problems. Still, 
the risk of cargo irregularities is high, and the 
port has an “unclaimed goods warehouse” for 
storage of goods that for some reason are not 
retrieved by clients. These goods are sold at 
auction after a determined period. The impact 
of delayed clearance of cargo affects not only 
the client, but the terminal itself, due to the 
need for extra space;
•	 Environmental risks: According to “A”, economic 
crises affect the negotiations with suppliers 
of the internal chain of the terminals. During 
economic downturns, the pressures increase 
to reduce costs, even for activities that are 
fundamental for the efficacy and efficiency of 
the activities. For “S”, the only risk within the 
port is the chance of a strike of the port authority 
workers, which occurs annually at the time of 
renewing the collective bargaining agreement. 
But its impacts are avoided by advance planning. 
When a strike is impending, the terminals are 
notified and start to work in round-the-clock 
shifts so as to offset the effect. With regard 
to legal/regulatory changes, “S” explained 
that due to the large number of governmental 
authorities involved, rule changes are frequent 
and the impact depends largely on the time 
limit given for compliance with the new rule. 
However, public authorities are required to give 
a reasonable time frame for adjustment to new 
rules, so this does not pose a major problem. 
Internally, rule changes are sometimes instituted 
by CSN, such as the hierarchy for approval of 
material requisitions, which can increase the 
time for approval. To minimize the impact of 
strikes, the terminals plan for the work stoppage 
dates and release ships in advance and alter 
the windows for arrival, so that inbound and 
outbound traffic does not coincide;
•	 Regarding natural disasters, both respondents 
said none have ever occurred. However, 
employee “S” mentioned that even though the 
bay has calm water and the region is not prone 
to earthquakes, tsunamis or storm surf, the risk 
exists of ships arriving late due such occurrences 
in other places. With respect to contagious 
diseases, at the time of the avian flu outbreak, 
the National Sanitary Surveillance Agency 
(ANVISA) required more rigorous inspection 
of ships. Furthermore, to minimize the risk of 
diseases spread by rodents, plastic guards are 
placed on the mooring lines to prevent animals 
from leaving or boarding ships (in the latter case 
also to reduce damage to cargoes);
•	 With respect to demand risks, employee “S” 
stated that volatility of demand for terminal 
services is inherent to their operations. In turn, 
employee “A” mentioned that higher demand 
means greater utilization of consumable materials 
and greater need for maintenance of machinery 
and equipment, which if not performed correctly 
increases the risks of technical failures. Regarding 
inventory problems, employee “A” said this 
occurs on a monthly basis, especially due to 
lack of planning and control by the terminal’s 
manager;
•	 Both employees stated that operational risks 
are the most frequent category. Because the 
machines for loading and unloading ships are 
large and heavy, breakdowns are a constant threat. 
Alterations in the dates of receiving ships are 
also frequent, but expected. A way to minimize 
the risk of delays or inability to receive a ship is 
the assignment of windows, or time intervals of 
a few days before and after the estimated time 
of arrival, during which a ship has priority to 
moor at the terminal. The technological changes 
occur in two situations, according to employee 
“S”: at the requirement of the Federal Revenue 
Service for use of non-invasive scanners to 
inspect containers, and technological changes 
in ships. According to the documents provided 
by the company, the changes in ship sizes have 
a direct impact on the port operations, and the 
ability to handle larger vessels is the principal 
factor in terms of competitiveness. Employee 
“S” also stressed that the main factor for the 
competitiveness of a terminal is its capacity to 
receive ships. Figure 3 shows the original plan 
for the terminal’s depth and the corresponding 
11/14
Supply chain risk management…
Gest. Prod., São Carlos, v. 26, n. 3, e4900, 2019
draft limits of the ships. Besides the pressure 
to handle larger ships, he stressed the need 
to reduce costs and gain scale as causes of 
the need to alter the terminal. With respect to 
competitiveness, employee “S” explained the 
project to unify berths to enable the terminal to 
moor two ships simultaneously and commented 
about the capacities of the ports of Rio de 
Janeiro and Santos, explaining the need to 
make adjustments to adjust to the upgrades of 
competing ports;
•	 On the risks of rupture of the chain, employee 
“A” explained that sometimes suppliers fail to 
deliver products on time, especially imported 
products due to problems with customs clearance. 
Another problem that occurs in the terminal 
is the legal process for entry of goods in the 
terminal. This process involves the Federal 
Police and the Federal Revenue Service. Many 
times the red tape hampers the entry, and some 
suppliers of the terminal even have refused to 
make deliveries because of the bureaucratic 
hurdles and delays. The lack of information, 
especially internal, was also mentioned. Since 
requisitions have to be sent to the supply sector, 
sometimes the process does not work property 
or the information on the priority of the demand 
is not available;
•	 Other risks: The respondents mentioned some 
specific risks of the terminals.
The natural process of silting causes the need for 
periodic dredging. But this requires various approvals, 
with a direct reflection on projects to improve 
infrastructure, in turn directly linked to competitiveness. 
Employee “S” explained that the dredging process of 
the terminal requires: 1) authorization of Companhia 
Docas; 2) license from the State Environmental 
Institute (INEA); 3) authorization from the Navy; 
and 4) compliance with the procedures described 
in NORMAN 11. When dredging is not performed 
timely, “special” maneuvering is required of ships, 
increasing the costs of clients.
When the depth is reduced because of lack of 
dredging, the pilots have to carry out “special” 
maneuvers, raising the cost to clients. Since pilots 
belong to an independent professional class, their 
demands cannot be foreseen or coordinated.
The ecological risks of the port activity are also 
high, in particular due to presence of the Guiana 
dolphin, a rare species for which increasingly stringent 
protection measures have been required by INEA in 
recent years.
A final risk mentioned was security on the 
“Metropolitan Arc”, the highway that provides access 
to the port. It is not properly policed, so the incidence 
of highjacking is higher than it should be.
It could be perceived from the two interviews that 
the company that operates the terminals does not 
have a formally structured risk management process. 
However, some actions are taken by the company that 
configure a strategy to minimize and control risks, 
especially operational ones. During the interviews, 
the respondents expressed the interpretation that the 
supply chain is an internal sector of the terminal. 
This was expressed when one of the respondents 
understands Supply as the warehouse sector. And 
they stressed that “[…] the scope of the terminal 
starts at the moment the ship arrives at the ‘gate’”, 
demonstrating that the supply chain is not seen in 
the broader concept of stretching from the suppliers 
of raw materials to the final consumers.
The company studied is not unique on not having 
a structured risk management process. Manuj et al. 
(2014) cited a survey of 600 firms where only 33% 
used risk management approaches to proactively and 
strategically manage supply chain risk, and only 45% 
of the executives interviewed believed their supply 
chain risk management programs were sufficiently 
robust to minimize risks.
However, for the majority of the risk categories 
presented to the respondents, they mentioned at 
least one action taken to mitigate or control the risk, 
indicating the company’s concern with minimizing 
the impacts of the risks investigated.
As an example of these actions, we can cite the 
company’s procurement process, which is subject 
to well-structured tender rules; the work done to 
inform clients about how to avoid delays in customs 
clearance; the planning to prevent losses due to strikes; 
and the placement of rat guards on the mooring lines 
to prevent access to cargoes.
The preventive maintenance sector was also 
indicated as instrumental in identifying, controlling 
and mitigating internal operational risks.
Nevertheless, the interviewees did not comment 
on any comprehensive and formal process to identify 
potential sources of future risks. This lack of structured 
risk management process is not a unique problem. 
The literature contains many references to difficulties 
of making available time and resources to identify 
and face risks. For example, Thun & Hoenig (2011) 
state that firms have great difficulty to measure the 
benefits of hedging against risks, which hampers 
implementation of adequate instruments to identify 
risks and to structure SCRM processes.
Furthermore, one of the main risks mentioned by 
the respondents to the supply chain of terminals is 
the large number of regulatory entities of waterway 
transport in Brazil, as also identified in the literature. 
12/14
Dias, G. C. et al.
Gest. Prod., São Carlos, v. 26, n. 3, e4900, 2019
Collyer (2013) noted that the large number of oversight 
and control authorities of waterway transport in Brazil 
places a heavy bureaucratic burden on companies in 
the sector. Indeed, there are over 30 such entities in 
the three spheres of government: among them at the 
national level the National Waterway Transportation 
Agency (ANTAQ), the Special Secretariat of Ports 
(SEP), the Federal Revenue Service (RFB), Brazilian 
Navy, Brazilian Institute of the Environment (IBAMA), 
Federal Audit Tribunal (TCU), Federal Police and 
National Sanitary Surveillance Agency (ANVISA). 
Many state and municipal agencies and departments 
have concurrent jurisdiction.
Besides the regulatory authorities, there are many 
laws that regulate port activities, again at all three levels 
of government, each one with follow-on regulatory 
decrees, edicts, resolutions, etc. Again, just at the 
federal level we can mention Law 8,630/93 (Law of 
Ports), Law 9,432/97 (regarding waterway traffic) and 
Law 10,233/2001 (which created ANTAQ).
Another problem related to the variety of governmental 
bodies with authority is the existence of a shipyard 
specialized in building nuclear submarines, at a site 
originally slated for expansion of berths. Besides the 
nuclear risks this poses to ships, cargoes and workers 
in the port, there was no prior communication to the 
operators of the terminals.
A final risk factor identified at the port is the 
volatility of demand, which also is in line with the 
literature on SCRM. Boyson (2014) states that in 
settings with large volatility of demand, formal 
controls are in general insufficient, which can explain 
the unstructured treatment of supply chain risks at 
the Port of Sepetiba. In turn, Trkman & McCormack 
(2009) affirm that market turbulence and demand 
volatility are by themselves motive to have a structured 
SCRM process to help reduce risks.
It is important to note that the main client of the 
two terminals is, naturally, CSN, the parent company, 
which benefits from having its own terminals. This 
itself can be understood as a strategy to mitigate 
risks of seaborne transport. The ownership structure 
of the railroad serving the port, MRS Logística, also 
is part of a risk mitigation and cost control strategy, 
since both CSN and Vale have substantial minority 
stakes (and Gerdau also has a small equity position). 
It mainly carries inbound raw materials and outbound 
finished products for these three companies.
We observed the importance of the port in the 
supply chain of CSN and the other two companies 
involved in mining/steelmaking as well as the container 
clients, and the leading role of the managers of the 
terminals in interface with regulatory agencies, pilots, 
ship owners and clients, with a fundamental role in 
managing supply chain risks. The effectiveness of this 
effort is a key factor for competitiveness in relation 
to other terminals.
In the examples of risk to supply, it was clear that 
the port management needs to provide substantial 
assistance to the companies that will receive the goods 
carried. Goods not released by customs are a risk to 
the receivers and the terminals themselves, due to the 
extra demand for storage space. Therefore, support for 
interface with customs and other regulatory authorities 
is a key service to clients by the terminal operators.
As best put by Trkman & McCormack (2009), in 
the present environment companies can no longer 
interact in a dichotomic manner. Instead, objectives 
need to be shared, whereby the ability to offer goods 
and services is the responsibility not of a single firm, 
but of the chain as a whole.
5 Conclusion
The results of this study reveal that the risks a port 
can pose to the organizations in its chain range from 
brief supply interruption to complete rupture. The risks 
of delays of raw materials to reach manufacturers or 
final products to reach customers due to problems 
during maritime transport and cargo handling in 
ports are large, as reflected in the comments of the 
interviewees.
Actions for identification and mitigation exist for 
the majority of these risks, as shown in the results, 
each one related to its characteristics.
However, the port in question does not have a 
structured supply chain risk management process, 
although the conditions exist to implement one based 
on the actions already taken and the contact among 
the managers of the terminals and various links of 
the chains of the terminals’ clients.
When asked if the company carries out risk 
management actions, both respondents answered 
negatively. This demonstrates that the field of study 
can make a positive contribution in the country, as is 
the case internationally (given the growing number 
of publications observed since 2004).
Actions to prevent movement of rodents to and 
from ships, planning of ship arrivals, development of 
internal supply structures and orientation of clients 
on the bureaucratic processes for importation and 
exportation, cited by the interviewees, can be seen 
as risk mitigation actions.
We believe that with more frequent contact and 
better cooperation between the port managers and 
the other links in the chain, the risk management 
process can be structured, enhancing the efficacy of 
the mitigation and control steps. On the one hand, 
the terminals engage in interface with ship owners, 
pilots and regulatory agencies, while the client 
companies engage in interface with suppliers and 
final customers, so all that is lacking is a link between 
these two smaller chains to reduce the risks along the 
entire chain. In this respect, the port administrators 
13/14
Supply chain risk management…
Gest. Prod., São Carlos, v. 26, n. 3, e4900, 2019
will play the key role, due to their privileged position 
and common interaction with all these agents.
This communication and interface among all the 
members can have beneficial consequences on the 
robustness and agility of the chain, with commensurate 
benefits for all the links.
With the interviews it was possible to attain 
the objective of understanding the risks the port 
operations can pose to the companies in its upstream 
and downstream chains and how they are treated by 
the managers. This involved listing the risks already 
identified by the managers and identifying others, 
by means of the questionnaire that contained risk 
categories mentioned in the literature.
Since we found very few publications on SCRM 
in ports in general, or on a specific type of risk, as 
presented in the theoretical reference, we believe 
this study contributes to the theme. Applying the 
questionnaire to identify what risks are perceived by 
the port’s managers opens perspectives for identifying 
which are most relevant and frequent, and thus 
should receive priority treatment by the organization. 
In particular, we did not find publications seeking 
to identify the existence of a structured SCRM 
process or the actions carried out by Brazilian port 
administrations.
The main limitation of this study is the absence 
of analysis with any of the companies that use the 
port’s services or final consumers, to obtain a more 
complete vision of the risks of import and export 
operations.
For a future studies, we suggest investigating 
the feasibility of structuring the supply chain risk 
management process in Brazilian ports, through 
analysis of the other companies that form the chain, 
and to analyze the viewpoints of other stakeholders, 
such as regulatory and other governmental entities, 
and upstream and downstream users of port services.
References
Blome, C., & Schoenherr, T. (2011). Supply chain risk 
management in financial crises: a multiple case-
study approach. International Journal of Production 
Economics, 134(1), 43-57. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijpe.2011.01.002.
Blos, M. F., Quaddus, M., Wee, H. M., & Watanabe, K. 
(2009). Supply chain risk management (SCRM): a 
case study on the automotive and electronic industries 
in Brazil. Supply Chain Management, 14(4), 247-252. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/13598540910970072.
Boyson, S. (2014). Cyber supply chain risk management: 
revolutionizing the strategic control of critical IT 
systems. Technovation, 34(7), 342-353. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.technovation.2014.02.001.
Collyer, W. O. (2013). A importância do direito marítimo 
e da regulação dos transportes e portos para o 
desenvolvimento da logística. Journal of Transport 
Literature, 7(1), 194-201. http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/
S2238-10312013000100012.
Diabat, A., Govindan, K., & Panicker, V. V. (2012). Supply 
chain risk management and its mitigation in a food 
industry. International Journal of Production Research , 
50(11), 3039-3050. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0020754
3.2011.588619.
Fan, L., Wilson, W. W., & Dahl, B. (2015). Risk analysis 
in port competition for containerized imports. European 
Journal of Operational Research, 245(3), 743-753. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2015.03.051.
Figueiredo, G. (2000). O papel dos portos concentradores 
na cadeia logística global. In Anais do XX Encontro 
Nacional de Engenharia de Produção. Rio de Janeiro: 
ABEPRO.
Gerhardt, T. E., & Silveira, D. T. (2009). Métodos de 
pesquisa (1. ed., Série Educação à Distância). Porto 
Alegre: UFRGS.
Ghadge, A., Dani, S., & Kalawsky, R. (2012). Supply chain 
risk management: present and future scope. International 
Journal of Logistics Management, 23(3), 313-339. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1108/09574091211289200.
Hallikas, J., Karvonen, I., Pulkkinen, U., Virolainen, V. M., 
& Tuominen, M. (2004). Risk management processes in 
supplier networks. International Journal of Production 
Economics, 90(1), 47-58. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijpe.2004.02.007.
Hendricks, K. B., Singhal, V. R., & Zhang, R. (2009). The 
effect of operational slack, diversification, and vertical 
relatedness on the stock market reaction to supply chain 
disruptions. Journal of Operations Management, 27(3), 
233-246. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jom.2008.09.001.
Jüttner, U. (2005). Supply chain risk management: 
understanding the business requirements from a 
practitioner perspective. International Journal of 
Logistics Management, 16(1), 120-141. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1108/09574090510617385.
Kern, D., Moser, R., Hartmann, E., & Moder, M. (2012). 
Supply risk management: model development and 
empirical analysis. International Journal of Physical 
Distribution & Logistics Management, 42(1), 60-82. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/09600031211202472.
Lacerda, S. M. (2005). Investimentos nos portos brasileiros: 
oportunidade da concessão da infra-estrutura portuária. 
BNDES Setorial, 22, 297-315.
Lambert, D. M., & Cooper, M. C. (2000). Issues in 
supply chain management. Industrial Marketing 
Management, 29(1), 65-83. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0019-8501(99)00113-3.
Lavastre, O., Gunasekaran, A., & Spalanzani, A. (2012). 
Supply chain risk management in French companies. 
Decision Support Systems, 52(4), 828-838. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.dss.2011.11.017.
14/14
Dias, G. C. et al.
Gest. Prod., São Carlos, v. 26, n. 3, e4900, 2019
Manuj, I., & Mentzer, J. T. (2008). Global supply chain 
risk management. Journal of Business Logistics, 29(1), 
133-155. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/j.2158-1592.2008.
tb00072.x.
Manuj, I., Esper, T. L., & Stank, T. P. (2014). Supply chain 
risk management approaches under different conditions 
of risk. Journal of Business Logistics, 35(3), 241-258. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jbl.12051.
Monié, F., & Vidal, S. M. D. S. C. (2006). Cidades, portos 
e cidades portuárias na era da integração produtiva. 
Revista de Administração Pública, 40(6), 975-995. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/S0034-76122006000600003.
Norrman, A., & Jansson, U. (2004). Ericsson’s proactive 
supply chain risk management approach after a serious 
sub‐supplier accident. International Journal of Physical 
Distribution & Logistics Management, 34(5), 434-456. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/09600030410545463.
Oliveira, U. R., Marins, F. A. S., Rocha, H. M., & Salomon, 
V. A. P. (2017). The ISO 31000 standard in supply chain 
risk management. Journal of Cleaner Production, 151, 
616-633. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.03.054.
Pfohl, H., Gallus, P., & Thomas, D. (2011). Interpretive structural 
modeling of supply chain risks. International Journal of 
Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 41(9), 
839-859. http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/09600031111175816.
Pfohl, H.-C., Köhler, H., & Thomas, D. (2010). State 
of the art in supply chain risk management research: 
empirical and conceptual findings and a roadmap for 
the implementation in practice. Logistics Research, 2(1), 
33-44. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12159-010-0023-8.
Rao, S., & Goldsby, T. J. (2009). Supply chain risks: 
a review and typology. International Journal of 
Logistics Management, 20(1), 97-123. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1108/09574090910954864.
Ritchie, B., & Brindley, C. (2007). An emergent framework 
for supply chain risk management and performance 
measurement. The Journal of the Operational Research 
Society, 58(11), 1398-1411. http://dx.doi.org/10.1057/
palgrave.jors.2602412.
Scannell, T., Curkovic, S., & Wagner, B. (2013). Integration 
of ISO 31000:2009 and supply chain risk management. 
American Journal of Industrial and Business Management, 
3(4), 367-377. http://dx.doi.org/10.4236/ajibm.2013.34043.
Shi, D. (2004). A review of enterprise supply chain risk 
management. Journal of Systems Science and Systems 
Engineering, 13(2), 219-244. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s11518-006-0162-2.
Shu, T., Chen, S., Wang, S., & Lai, K. K. (2014). GBOM-
oriented management of production disruption risk 
and optimization of supply chain construction. Expert 
Systems with Applications, 41(1), 59-68. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.eswa.2013.07.011.
Singhal, P., Agarwal, G., & Mittal, M. L. (2011). Supply 
chain risk management: review, classification and future 
research directions. International Journal of Business 
Science and Applied Management, 6, 15-42.
Tang, C. S. (2006). Perspectives in supply chain risk 
management. International Journal of Production 
Economics, 103(2), 451-488. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijpe.2005.12.006.
Thun, J.-H., & Hoenig, D. (2011). An empirical analysis 
of supply chain risk management in the German 
automotive industry. International Journal of Production 
Economics, 131(1), 242-249. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijpe.2009.10.010.
Tovar, A., & Ferreira, G. (2006). A infra-estrutura portuária 
brasileira: o modelo atual e perspectivas para seu 
desenvolvimento sustentado. Revista do BNDES, 13, 
209-230.
Trkman, P., & McCormack, K. (2009). Supply chain risk 
in turbulent environments: a conceptual model for 
managing supply chain network risk. International 
Journal of Production Economics, 119(2), 247-258. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2009.03.002.
Tuncel, G., & Alpan, G. (2010). Risk assessment and 
management for supply chain networks: a case study. 
Computers in Industry, 61(3), 250-259. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.compind.2009.09.008.
Velasco, L. O. M., & Lima, E. T. (1998). Privatização dos 
portos brasileiros. BNDES Setorial, 7, 79-92.
Wagner, S. M., & Bode, C. (2008). An empirical examination 
of supply chain performance along several dimensions 
of risk. Journal of Business Logistics, 29(1), 307-325. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/j.2158-1592.2008.tb00081.x.
Web of Science. (2018). Designated search. Retrieved in 
2008, January 10, from http://apps-webofknowledge.
ez24.periodicos.capes.gov.br/WOS_GeneralSearch_input.
do?product=WOS&search_mode=GeneralSearch&SI
D=7FVVkgJmnoxMJm9pE6y&preferencesSaved=
Wieland, A., & Wallenburg, C. M. (2012). Dealing with 
supply chain risks. International Journal of Physical 
Distribution & Logistics Management, 42(10), 887-
905. http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/09600031211281411.
Wu, T., Huang, S., Blackhurst, J., Zhang, X., & Wang, S. 
(2013). Supply chain risk management: an agent-based 
simulation to study the impact of retail stockouts. IEEE 
Transactions on Engineering Management, 60(4), 676-
686. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2012.2190986.
Xia, D., & Chen, B. (2011). A comprehensive decision-
making model for risk management of supply chain. 
Expert Systems with Applications, 38(5), 4957-4966. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2010.09.156.
Xiao, Y., Fu, X., Ng, A. K. Y., & Zhang, A. (2015). Port 
investments on coastal and marine disasters prevention: 
economic modeling and implications. Transportation 
Research Part B: Methodological, 78, 202-221. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trb.2015.04.009.
