               D32235D7C734F725F3CEB122F4F2567F     GROBID - A machine learning software for extracting information from scholarly documents           Temperature in degrees Celsius (°C) may be converted to degrees Fahrenheit (°F) as follows: 

 °F = (1.8 × °C) + 32.  

 Introduction Riparian ecosystems are dynamic, disturbance-driven habitats (Poff and others, 1997) , and temporal changes to riparian vegetation are integral to riparian functioning  (Naiman and Decamps, 1997;  Tabacchi and others, 1998) .   Disturbance events, particularly floods, periodically reshape riparian areas by eroding and depositing sediment, distributing seeds and propagules, redistributing nutrients, and damaging or removing vegetation (Stevens and Waring, 1986;  Gregory and others, 1991;  Tabacchi and others, 1998;  Dong and others, 2016) .   Between large disturbance events, succession occurs, leading to changes in vegetation structure, composition, and aerial extent (Webb and Leake, 2006;  Stromberg and others, 2010;  Sarr and others, 2011;  Sankey and others, 2015) .   Changes in riparian vegetation composition and cover over time are therefore expected consequences of natural ecosystem processes. 

 Flow regime is a primary controlling factor for riparian vegetation composition and change (Poff and others, 1997;  Stromberg and others, 2007) .   The timing, magnitude, duration, and frequency of flooding establishes the rate of succession and development of riparian vegetation (Tabacchi and others, 1998) .   Natural flow regimes can be highly dynamic within a year but are fairly predictable across years, such that high and low flows exhibit a consistent seasonality (Poff and others, 1997;  Topping and others, 2003) .   High volume or long duration floods can remove vegetation, clearing the riparian area for new colonization (Stevens and Waring, 1985;  Dean and Schmidt, 2011) .   Many Populus (cottonwood) and Salix (willow) species require vegetation-clearing floods during species-specific times of the year in order to germinate (González and others, 2018) ; without such floods, their populations decline  (Rood and others, 2005;  Merritt and Poff, 2010;  Mortenson and Weisberg, 2010) .   Reduced flood peaks-whether due to climate shifts or river regulationcan create an opportunity for riparian vegetation to expand and stabilize the floodplain (Sankey and others, 2015;  Scott and others, 2018) .   Increasing year-round baseflows (in other words, creating a constant water supply) in concert with flood-peak reduction provides the context for woody riparian species to proliferate (Stromberg and others, 2007;  Mortenson and Weisberg, 2010;  Sankey and others, 2015) and can promote clonal growth  (Douhovnikoff and others, 2005;  Ralston, 2011) -an example of how alterations to flow regime can change the composition, cover, and diversity of riparian vegetation.   The parameters of the new flow regime and the available species pool determine the resulting riparian vegetation community. 

 The influence of flow regime on trends in riparian vegetation change is constrained by a hierarchy of environmental variables.  At a broad scale, riparian vegetation communities shift along longitudinal gradients related to climate (McShane and others, 2015;  Palmquist and others, 2018a) .   As changes in climate occur over time (manifested as temperature, precipitation, and subsequent flow dynamics), riparian species composition is also likely to change (Perry and others, 2015;  Reynolds and others, 2015) .   Within landscape-scale patterns of climate, channel form, geology, geomorphology, and alternating constrained and floodplain river reaches affect species occurrence (Tabacchi and others, 1998;  McShane and others, 2015) .   Flow interactions with geomorphology maintain a mosaic of vegetation patches with differing species compositions based on differences in soil water holding capacity and topography (Lytle and Poff, 2004;  Lite and others, 2005;  Stromberg and others, 2007) .   Channel form controls the velocity and depth of flows, such that narrow reaches have different flood dynamics than wide reaches.  At a local scale, species turnover occurs along lateral gradients related to water and oxygen availability (Bendix, 1994b;  Lite and others, 2005) , with more flood tolerant species growing closer to base flows  (McCoy-Sulentic and others, 2017a) .  

 River regulation via large dams affects riparian vegetation composition and cover through many of the same mechanisms listed above.  Large dams dramatically change flow regime and reduce sediment inputs (Webb and others, 1999;  Gloss and others, 2005;  Magilligan and Nislow, 2005) .   They can alter the geomorphic template of a river by changing the grain size distribution of sediment deposits, eroding potential habitat for vegetation, and changing feedback loops between vegetation and sediment (Rubin and others, 2002;  Hazel and others, 2006;  Butterfield and others, 2020) .   Depending on pre-and post-dam flow characteristics, riparian vegetation can increase or decrease in cover and richness, shift in species composition, maintain or lose functional groups, and change in genetic structure (Jansson and others, 2000;  Douhovnikoff and others, 2005;  Beauchamp and Stromberg, 2008;  Merritt and Poff, 2010;  Bejarano and others, 2012;  Werth and others, 2014;  Sankey and others, 2015;  Bejarano and others, 2018) .   Vegetation changes related to dam operations can occur on different time and spatial scales depending on the natural processes affected and species longevity.  Long after dam operations are implemented, riparian vegetation composition and cover can continue to shift as a result of ecosystem change, flow regime management, invasive plant species management, and the occurrence of other disturbances such as fire, restoration efforts, and insect herbivory (Stevens and others, 1995;  Kearsley and Ayers, 1996;  Sankey and others, 2015) .  

 Tracking riparian vegetation change is a primary method for assessing riparian ecosystem condition because riparian vegetation exists at the intersection between aquatic and terrestrial systems and provides habitat and other key resources for both (Merritt and others, 2017;  Palmquist and others, 2018b;  Perkins and others, 2018) .   Consistent monitoring of vegetation and periodic assessment of the data collected to identify changes to riparian species diversity, distributions, and cover provide information about the trajectory of riparian vegetation change relative to hydrology and other abiotic or management manipulations (for example, invasive plant management).  In this report, we examine plant species composition and trends in plant cover from 2014 to 2019 along the segment of the Colorado River between Glen Canyon Dam and Lake Mead.  These patterns are analyzed in the context of hydrologic, geomorphological, and climate parameters and discussed relative to other sources of vegetation change (for example, vegetation management actions and biological control of invasive species). 

 The segment of the Colorado River between Glen Canyon Dam and Lake Mead supports a culturally and ecologically important riparian ecosystem that fulfills a variety of societal and ecological functions.  Located in northwestern Arizona, this section of the Colorado River (hereafter referred to as the "study area" or "study reach") flows through the lower part of Glen Canyon, Marble Canyon, and Grand Canyon within Glen Canyon National Recreation Area (GLCA) and Grand Canyon National Park (GRCA).  The study area supports a suite of animal life including birds, mammals, amphibians, reptiles, and invertebrates (Carothers and others, 1976;  Schmidt and others, 1998;  Stevens and others, 2001;  Holmes and others, 2005) .   Riparian vegetation in Grand Canyon is traditionally important to many regional tribes, in part for its role in supporting the overall health of Grand Canyon ecosystems and for the usefulness of particular species (Mayes and Lacy, 1989;  Fairley, 2005;  Jackson-Kelly and Hubbs, 2007) .   Some plant species are important to river recreationists for the shade and protection from wind they provide in a hot, dry climate (Stewart and others, 2003) .   In the southwestern United States, where riparian areas are often impaired and degraded (Stromberg and others, 2012;  Stromberg and others, 2013) , this riparian area supports some functions lost in other dryland areas  (Spence, 2006) .  

 Riparian vegetation expansion in the study area has a positive effect on bird communities.  The diversity and abundance of bird species increased with the establishment of perennial riparian vegetation near the river's edge (Brown and Johnson, 1985) and are predicted to increase further as habitat patches grow larger and become more contiguous  (Holmes and others, 2005) .   The volume and location of woody plant species are identified as key qualities for predicting the abundance of breeding birds (Sogge and others, 1998;  Spence, 2006) .   Plant species composition is also important to breeding birds; for example, Prosopis glandulosa (honey mesquite) and Senegalia greggii (catclaw acacia) densities promote bird density (Kearsley and others, 2004) .   Changes to the extent, amount, and species composition of riparian vegetation in the study area will affect bird diversity and abundance (Holmes and others, 2005) .  

 In the study area, increases in shrubby riparian plant cover are considered detrimental to campsites and archeological sites, which are identified as key resources in the Glen Canyon Dam Long-Term Experimental and Management Plan (U.S.  Department of the Interior, 2016; Durning and others, 2021) .   Increased shrub cover on historically large, bare sandbars is the primary cause of a 37-percent reduction from 2002 to 2016 in the limited camping area available for the more than 25,000 boaters and hikers that recreate in the area annually (National Park Service, 2006;  Hadley and others, 2018) .   The study area provides a unique wilderness experience for recreationists that is supported in part by access to a sufficient number of suitable campsites and day use areas (Kearsley and others, 1994;  Kaplinski and others, 2005) .   Vegetation expansion on large sandbars in the study area also reduces aeolian transport of sand, which has historically facilitated the burial and protection of archeological sites (East and others, 2017;  Hadley and others, 2018;  Kasprak and others, 2018) ; thus, vegetation expansion decreases the stability of the unique cultural legacy found along the Colorado River  (Sankey and Draut, 2014) .   Vegetation expansion near the river edge is predicted to continue (Sankey and others, 2015;  Kasprak and others, 2018) , potentially exacerbating the negative effects of riparian vegetation expansion on these Colorado River resources.  

 As identified in the record of decision for the Glen Canyon Dam Long-Term Experimental and Management Plan final environmental impact statement (U.S.  Department of the Interior, 2016), the goal for riparian vegetation in the study area is to "maintain native vegetation and wildlife habitat, in various stages of maturity, such that they are diverse, healthy, productive, self-sustaining, and ecologically appropriate." 

 The long-term monitoring data presented herein can be used to address questions related to the diversity, productivity, and relative dominance of native and nonnative species in terms of areal cover and species composition.  Assessing the quality of wildlife habitat would require additional sampling of vegetation structure, and assessing the maturity, health, and sustainability of vegetation would require plant growth and demography monitoring that is beyond the scope of this program.  However, the long-term monitoring data herein can provide indirect insights into such objectives.  The objective of ecological appropriateness can be judged by stakeholders on the basis of the results presented in this report. 

 To reliably and consistently track changes to riparian vegetation within the study area, a long-term monitoring protocol was developed and implemented by the Grand Canyon Monitoring and Research Center (GCMRC; Palmquist and others, 2018b;  Palmquist and others, 2019) .   Given the influence of geomorphology, climate, and flow regime in determining riparian vegetation composition and cover, the protocol incorporates geomorphic feature classes, flow parameters, and river segments related to floristic groups and climate into vegetation sampling.  The primary objectives of the GCMRC riparian monitoring program are as follows: 

 • Annually measure and summarize the status (that is, composition and cover) of native and nonnative vascular plant species within the riparian zone of the Colorado River between Glen Canyon Dam and Lake Mead. 

 • At 5-year intervals, assess change in the vegetation composition and cover within the riparian zone, as related to geomorphic setting and dam operations (particularly flow regime). 

 • Collect data in such a manner that it can be used by multiple stakeholders and is compatible with the basin-wide monitoring program overseen by the National Park Service's Northern Colorado Plateau Network Inventory and Monitoring program (Perkins and others, 2018) .  

 This status and trends report summarizes species composition and cover data collected from 2014 to 2019, with special consideration given to floristic region, hydrologic position, associated geomorphic feature, and native and nonnative species. 



 Methods  Study Area  Physical Setting The section of the Colorado River between Glen Canyon Dam and the high-water inflow of Lake Mead is an approximately 415-kilometer (km; 260-mile [mi] ) reach that passes through Glen Canyon National Recreation Area and Grand Canyon National Park (fig.   1 ).   Locations along the river are denoted using river kilometers (Rkm; Gushue, 2019)that is, by their distance downstream (positive numbers) or upstream (negative numbers) from Lees Ferry as measured in kilometers along the channel centerline.  For the purposes of the GCMRC riparian monitoring program, the river corridor is divided into four segments that relate to geography and floristic composition (Palmquist and others, 2018a) : the Glen Canyon river segment, spanning from Rkm -25 to Rkm 0 (hereafter referred to as "Glen Canyon"); the Marble Canyon segment, spanning from Rkm 0 to Rkm 97 (hereafter "Marble Canyon"); the eastern Grand Canyon segment, spanning from Rkm 97 to Rkm 259 (hereafter "eastern Grand Canyon"); and the western Grand Canyon segment, spanning from Rkm 259 to Rkm 404 (hereafter "western Grand Canyon"; fig.   1 ).   At Rkm 404, the high-water line of Lake Mead is apparent on the shorelines of the Colorado River as deltaic sediments that were deposited when the reservoir was full; these deposits are not included in the GCMRC riparian monitoring protocol. 

 The geologic rock layers at river level include limestones, sandstones, and Precambrian metamorphic rocks, with each layer affecting the channel width and associated habitable area for plants.  Throughout the study area, the Colorado River is a canyon-bound river with a pool-drop rapid system in which rapids are associated with tributary debris fans (Schmidt and Graf, 1990) .   Approximately 740 tributaries (most of them ephemeral) join the Colorado River's mainstem between Glen Canyon Dam and Lake Mead (Griffiths and others, 2004) .   Debris fans originating from these tributaries form channel constrictions that create rapids and affect the direction and velocity of the river current and associated sediment deposition (Rubin and others, 1990) .   Upstream from a channel constriction, water pools and the current is slower, and sediment can accumulate along the upstream shoreline.  Downstream from a constriction, part of the current recirculates upstream and slows, creating an eddy wherein sediment deposition can also occur.  Shorelines both upstream and downstream from channel constrictions are areas where sediment accumulates and forms sandbars (fig.  2 ;  Schmidt and Graf, 1990;  Mueller and others, 2018) .   Within this geomorphic template, there are three generalized feature classes on which riparian vegetation can grow: debris fans, sandbars, and channel margins.  Debris fans are triangular or cone-shaped deposits of boulders, cobbles, gravel, and sand that typically emanate from tributaries; and sandbars are fine-grained deposits located upstream and downstream from debris fans.  Channel margins encompass all other shorelines and can consist of bedrock and (or) deposited boulders, cobbles, gravel, and sand (fig.  2 ).  



 Hydrology The hydrology of the study reach is controlled by Glen Canyon Dam (fig.  1 ).   Before dam operations began in 1963, the Colorado River had a seasonal snowmelt-dominated hydrograph with large seasonal flow volume variation and little daily variation; in the post-dam era, however, discharge fluctuates daily but is relatively similar across seasons (figs.  3,  4) .   Except for large, unplanned floods in the 1980s, post-dam floods peak at less than half the magnitude of pre-dam floods, are relatively infrequent, and occur primarily in the fall rather than late spring and summer (as was typical before the dam; Topping and others, 2003) .   Within the post-dam era, the magnitude of daily fluctuations from 1963 to the mid-1990s was greater (sometimes exceeding 790 m 3 /s) than it is under current conditions (in which it does not exceed 226 m 3 /s) owing to the implementation of the Modified Low Fluctuating Flow operation pattern (U.S.  Department of the Interior, 2016).  The potential for releases exceeding 707 m 3 /s over several days has increased relative to that from 1963 to 2011 owing to implementation of the Experimental Management Plan for Glen Canyon Dam.  This plan incorporates short-duration (that is, dayslong) high-flow experiment (HFE) releases in spring or fall if resource criteria for water, sediment, and fish are met (U.S.  Department of the Interior, 2016).  The pre-dam high-water line, the experimental high flows, and the daily fluctuating flows create a gradient of inundation frequency ranging from a more frequently flooded area close to the river to an infrequently flooded area far away from the shoreline (fig.  2 ).   Three hydrologic zones are delineated based on these effects of dam operations (fig.  4 ).   The active channel is the area that can be inundated by daily fluctuating flows (that is, by flows of 708 m 3 /s or less) and is the most frequently flooded zone.  The active floodplain is the area inundated by HFE releases (that is, by discharges between 708 and 1,274 m 3 /s) and is less frequently flooded than the active channel.  The inactive floodplain is the area within the historical high-water line that is no longer inundated by planned dam releases.  The inactive floodplain zone was last flooded in the 1980s and is currently more influenced by local precipitation than river flows (Sankey and others, 2015) .   Jan . 1920  Jan. 1930  Jan. 1950  Jan. 1960  Jan. 1940  Jan. 1970  Jan. 1980  Jan. 1990  Jan. 2000  Jan. 2010  Jan. 2020 Month and Year Discharge (cubic meters per second) men22-3168_fig 01  



 Riparian Vegetation History and Floristic Distributions Vegetation growing along the study reach varies greatly in structure, functional strategies, wetland indicator status, and floristic affinities (McCoy-Sulentic and others, 2017a;  McCoy-Sulentic and others, 2017b;  Palmquist and others, 2017;  Palmquist and others, 2018a) .   Species range from less than 1 centimeter tall to over 8 meters (m) tall and include annual, biennial, and perennial forbs, sedges, rushes, grasses, shrubs, and trees (Palmquist and others, 2017) .   Vegetation is densely layered in some parts of the canyon, consisting of a short-statured herbaceous layer (for example, Schedonorus arundinaceus, Cynodon dactylon, Equisetum x ferrissii, Euthamia occidentalis, Bromus diandrus), a midstory to overstory layer of woody shrubs (for example, Baccharis emoryi, Baccharis salicifolia, Pluchea sericea), and sometimes an overstory of trees (Prosopis glandulosa, Tamarix).  Individuals of Tamarix (saltcedar) in this study area (hereafter "Tamarix") conform to the morphology of T. ramosissima and T. chinensis and are likely hybrids of the two species given their widespread introgression in the western United States (Gaskin and Schaal, 2002) .   In other areas, such as less vegetated sandbars or newer debris fans, vegetation is sparse and short, comprised mostly of smaller shrubs and grasses. 

 Plant species in the study area are associated primarily with desert and semiarid regions of the western United States, particularly the Mojave and Sonoran deserts but also the Colorado Plateau, Great Basin, and the Rocky Mountains (Palmquist and others, 2018a) .   Floristic patterns along the river follow an increasing temperature gradient with distance from Glen Canyon Dam, and three distinct floristic regions can be delineated that correspond with different river segments (Butterfield and others, 2018;  Palmquist and others, 2018a) .   Of these floristic regions, Marble Canyon (Rkm 0-97) contains the highest proportion of species with affinities to higher elevation regions, particularly the Colorado Plateau and Rocky Mountains.  Eastern Grand Canyon (Rkm 97-259) features an intermediate floristic group comprising a mixture of plants from Marble Canyon and western Grand Canyon.  Western Grand Canyon (Rkm 259-404) is dominated by species with affinities to the Mojave and Sonoran deserts.  Glen Canyon (Rkm -25-0) was not included in Palmquist and others (2018a), but we address it in the present study to determine if the unique species found there differentiate Glen Canyon floristically from Marble Canyon.  Species composition also shifts laterally away from the river's edge with decreasing flood tolerance and increasing drought tolerance (McCoy-Sulentic and others, 2017a;  Butterfield and others, 2018) .   These shifts in species composition result in a corresponding shift in functional trait values (McCoy-Sulentic and others, 2017a) .  

 Prior to dam operations, the shoreline of the Colorado River through Marble and Grand Canyons was characterized much more by rock and sand than by riparian vegetation (Webb, 1996;  Webb and others, 2011;  Scott and others, 2018) .   The species recorded in the pre-dam era by Clover and Jotter (1944) are many of the dominant species recorded in current surveys, including nonnative species such as Cynodon dactylon (Bermuda grass) and Tamarix.   Native riparian trees such as Populus fremontii (Fremont cottonwood) and Salix gooddingii (Goodding's willow) were largely absent in the pre-dam era except at the mouths of tributaries and more protected areas (Clover and Jotter, 1944;  Turner and Karpiscak, 1980;  Scott and others, 2018) , though S. gooddingii appears to have been more common than P. fremontii  (Clover and Jotter, 1944;  Turner and Karpiscak, 1980) .   Naturally occurring P. fremontii and S. gooddingii stands are still uncommon in the study area. 

 Regulated flows from Glen Canyon Dam have allowed the areal cover of riparian vegetation to increase since dam operations began in 1963 (Sankey and others, 2015;  Mueller and others, 2018) , though growth rates vary in space and time.   Variable flow patterns, including large floods in the 1980s and increased base flows, have alternately removed some vegetation (Stevens and Waring, 1986) , supported fluvial marshes  (Stevens and others, 1995) , supported woody plant expansion into fluvial marshes  (Kearsley and Ayers, 1996) , promoted germination of and then eroded nonnative Tamarix seedlings  (Porter and Kearsley, 2001) , and created conditions favorable to clonal species  (Ralston, 2010;  Durning and others, 2021) .   Particularly since the beginning of Modified Low Fluctuating Flow in the early 1990s, vegetated area has increased in the active channel and active floodplain from approximately 5-9 percent to 25-40 percent depending on hydrological position (Sankey and others, 2015) .   Vegetation expansion is projected to continue under current dam operations and could increase 12 percent over the next 15 years (Kasprak and others, 2018) .  



 Climate Variability The climate of the study area is warm and dry with most precipitation falling in the winter and late summer (fig. 5;  Caster and Sankey, 2016) .   Late summer precipitation 



 Data Collection and Preparation Data collection follows the methods described in detail in Palmquist and others (2018b) with a few exceptions.   Data are collected at two different types of sites once per year: randomly selected sites that encompass multiple geomorphic features and are in different locations each year; and fixed-site eddy sandbars that are resampled each year.  Pilot studies were conducted in 2012 and 2013 at a subset of locations for both fixed-site and random site datasets (table 1 ).   Generally consistent sampling methods started in 2014 but were slightly modified for 2016 through 2019.  Modifications from 2014 consist of adding an estimate of total living foliar cover, adding a separate estimation of overhanging plant species, and changing from estimating multiple grain-size categories to grouping all grain sizes greater than 2 mm into one category. 

 In August and early September, randomly selected debris fans, channel margins, and eddy sandbars were sampled.  The random sampling protocol aimed to sample approximately equal numbers of these geomorphic features within each floristic segment each year (table 2 ).   Each year, a new set of sites were randomly selected in ArcGIS (Palmquist and others, 2018b) .   Sites that are sampled are removed from the pool of potential sampling sites for a five-year period. 

 Table 1 .   Number of sites sampled for randomly selected sites and fixed-site sandbars by year. 

 [Dataset definitions are as follows: "Glen Canyon random," randomly selected sites sampled in Glen Canyon (river kilometers [Rkm] -25-0); "Marble Canyon random," randomly selected sites sampled in Marble Canyon (Rkm 0-97); "Eastern GRCA random," randomly selected sites sampled in eastern Grand Canyon (Rkm 97 to 259); "Western GRCA random," randomly selected sites sampled in western Grand Canyon (Rkm 259 to 404); Fixed-site sandbars, sandbars that are sampled annually across all river segments.  "Pilot" indicates a smaller test subset of sites were sampled.] 

 Fixed-site SB -- -- 1 -- -- 20 -- -- 14 -- -- 8  In late September and October, fixed-site eddy sandbars were sampled.  These sites are locations previously identified for long-term geomorphic change monitoring (Kaplinski and others, 2014) and only include sandbars.   They are a mix of commonly used campsites and rarely visited locations that are mostly located in Marble Canyon and eastern Grand Canyon.  Two of these sites (-6 Mile in Glen Canyon and Granite Camp in eastern Grand Canyon) have undergone previous revegetation activities consisting of Tamarix removal and subsequent planting of native species (Ralston and Sarr, 2017) .   These sites were retained in analyses in order to fully evaluate riparian vegetation of the study area. 

 Sampling was separated by river segments related to geography and floristic composition: Glen Canyon (Rkm -25-0), Marble Canyon (Rkm 0-97), eastern Grand Canyon (Rkm 97-259), and western Grand Canyon (Rkm 259-404).  The number of sites sampled per river segment is based on segment length, such that the maximum sampling rate is one sample collected per 2.5 river miles (4.1 Rkm).  For the purpose of analysis, data from randomly selected sites and fixed-site sandbars were compiled for 2014 and from 2016 to 2019.  Data from 2012 and 2013 were excluded from analyses because of inconsistencies with data collection.  As few randomly selected sites were sampled in 2015, all data from that year were also excluded from analyses to make comparisons across time similar. 

 Individual species cover and total living foliar cover values are estimated within 1-square-meter (m 2 ) quadrats arranged along transects and stratified by flooding frequency.  At randomly selected sites, three transects are placed perpendicular to the river's current, each with nine sample quadrats (for a total of 27 quadrats per site; fig.  6 ).   At fixed-site sandbars, the site layout consists of a predetermined number of transects and quadrats based on sandbar size and shape.  These sites can have three or four transects with six or nine quadrats each.  Quadrats are stratified across the three hydrologic zones defined by dam operation parameters: the active channel, the active floodplain, and the inactive floodplain (fig.  6 ).   Equal numbers of quadrats are placed in each zone. 

 At each quadrat, visual cover estimates of each plant species rooted inside the frame, each species hanging over the frame but rooted outside of it, and total living foliar cover rooted inside the frame are recorded.  The latter two estimates were not conducted in 2014.  To standardize total living foliar cover across all years for analyses, the variable was estimated by summing all cover values for recorded species. 

 For additional details on sample site layout and data collection, see Palmquist and others (2018b) .   Data used for analyses are available from the U.S. Geological Survey ScienceBase catalog (Palmquist and others, 2022) .  



 Descriptive Summaries  Species Lists Lists of recorded species were compiled for the randomly selected sites dataset (app. 1) and for the fixed-site sandbars dataset (app.  2) using the R software environment (R Core Team, 2021).  Each list includes the number of sites at which each species was recorded for the study area and by river segment (app. 1, 2). 



 Community Composition Differences in community composition (that is, differences in recorded species and their relative abundances) between geomorphic feature classes in the random sampling dataset and the fixed-site sandbars were assessed through ordination.  To reduce the effect of zero-inflated data on the ordination results, relative abundance was quantified as the average cover of a species across all plots within a site and hydrologic zone for each year.  This resulted in a total of 1,925 site-zone-year sample points.  A detrended correspondence analysis (DCA) was first performed using the "decorana" function in the R vegan package (Oksanen and others, 2015) to determine if the primary compositional gradient was unimodal or linear.   The first DCA axis had a length of 7.4 standard deviations, indicating a unimodal gradient and supporting the continued use of DCA as an appropriate ordination technique.  Statistical differences in community composition between geomorphic feature types, river segments, hydrologic zones, and years were highly significant based on both the analysis of variance and permutational analysis of variance of DCA scores (all pairwise p-values < 0.001).  Thus, DCA results were further used for visualization and descriptive purposes.  Differences between categories of each factor (for example, between the active channel and active floodplain in the hydrologic zone analysis) were visualized in the DCA with error bars reflecting two standard errors of the mean. 



 Species Frequency For both randomly selected sites and fixed-site sandbars, the relative frequency of each species was calculated as the number of sites at which the species was recorded divided by the total number of sites (total number of randomly selected sites = 472; total number of fixed-site sandbars = 43).  Relative frequency was calculated for the entire study area for both randomly selected and fixed sites, and for each floristic segment for the randomly selected sites.  Relative frequency was not calculated by floristic segment for the fixed-site sandbars dataset because of the small sample sizes for some segments. 



 Foliar Cover Average cover and standard deviation were calculated for each species by floristic segment and geomorphic feature (fixed-site sandbars were treated as a fourth geomorphic feature).  Average site-level cover values for individual species were calculated in R by adding overhanging cover values to rooted cover values for each quadrat, then calculating the mean cover for each site.  For fixed-site sandbars, average cover values were calculated for each year (as opposed to across years).  Glen Canyon and Marble Canyon were combined because of the small sample sizes in Glen Canyon.  The five species with the highest cover values for the randomly selected sites and fixed-site sandbars were graphed (see "Results" section). 

 To visualize differences in total cover across the study area, total foliar cover estimates for 2016 through 2019 were averaged by site for the randomly selected sites and plotted against the corresponding river kilometer.  The mean, maximum, minimum, and standard deviation of total foliar cover values were calculated for each river segment. 



 Temporal Trends by Hydrologic Zone In accordance with the riparian vegetation resource goals outlined in the Glen Canyon Dam Long-Term Experimental and Management Plan, the species richness (total number of species), standardized proportion of native species richness versus nonnative species richness (number of native species divided by total number of species), total foliar cover (as percentage of quadrat), and proportion of native species cover versus nonnative species cover per quadrat were analyzed for temporal trends.  Tamarix, Pluchea sericea (arrowweed), and Baccharis spp.  were also analyzed for temporal trends, as these are species of management interest (U.S.  Department of the Interior, 2016; U.S. Department of the Interior, 2020).  For Baccharis spp.  analyses, Baccharis emoryi (Emory's baccharis), Baccharis salicifolia (mule fat), and Baccharis sarothroides (desertbroom) were grouped and analyzed together.  These three species have similar hydrologic niches (Butterfield and others, 2018) and are frequent in different segments of the study area (Palmquist and others, 2018a) .   Data were analyzed separately for the randomly selected sites and fixed-site sandbar sites using mixed-effects models with site as a random effect.  This approach was used to accommodate the statistical non-independence of plots within the same site.  Initial models were conducted with hydrologic zone (active channel, active floodplain, and inactive floodplain), floristic region (Glen Canyon-Marble Canyon river segment, eastern Grand Canyon river segment, and western Grand Canyon river segment), geomorphic feature type (sandbar, debris fan, and  channel margin), and  year (2014, 2016, 2017, 2018, and  2019 ) as fixed effects, including all possible interactions, for the random sampling sites.   The geomorphic feature type fixed effect was absent from analyses of the fixed-site sandbars.  Year, as a fixed effect, was treated as a categorical variable to account for potentially strong nonlinearities in vegetation status among years and because of the absence of complete data in 2015. 

 Hydrologic zone consistently presented in initial analyses as the strongest predictor variable of most aspects of vegetation status.  The inclusion of geomorphic feature and floristic region, even when significant, often did not result in significant differences among factor levels based on post-hoc analyses, and not all variables had sufficient data density to include all factors in a single model.  For the sake of clarity and consistency, all models presented in this report are based on the interaction between hydrologic zone and year.  Year was included in all models because of the explicit interest in identifying temporal trends in vegetation status.  Mixed-effects models were conducted with the "lmer" function in the lme4 package in R (Bates and others, 2015) and Tukey's post-hoc comparisons were conducted with the "emmeans" function in the emmeans package in R  (Lenth and others, 2018) .  



 Results  Descriptive Summaries Lists of recorded species for the randomly selected sites and the fixed-site sandbars are available in appendix 1 and appendix 2, respectively.  The number of species recorded at randomly selected sites was 296; at the fixed-site sandbars, 218 species were recorded. 



 Community Composition Geomorphic feature, river segment, and hydrologic zone exhibited differences in community composition (fig.  7 ).   There was little difference across years.  Community composition differed substantially between the fixed-site sandbar and the randomly selected debris fan and channel margin sites, with random sampling sandbars intermediate (fig.  7 ).   Debris fan and channel margin sites did not differ in composition.  These differences were most strongly expressed along the first DCA axis.  Glen Canyon, Marble Canyon, eastern Grand Canyon, and western Grand Canyon also differed in community composition.  Glen Canyon and Marble Canyon were most similar in community composition.  The community composition of sites in eastern Grand Canyon was intermediate between the community composition of sites in western Grand Canyon and that of Glen Canyon and Marble Canyon sites.  Hydrologic zones also showed differences in plant species composition, with the active channel and the inactive floodplain exhibiting the greatest difference. 



 Species Frequency The three most frequent native species were the same for randomly selected sites and fixed-site sandbars: Baccharis emoryi, Sporobolus flexuosus (mesa dropseed), and Equisetum x ferrissii (horsetail; tables 3, 4).  Bromus species and Tamarix were the most frequent nonnative groups for both types of sites (tables 5, 6).  Cynodon dactylon was frequent at both randomly selected sites and fixed-site sandbars but more so at the former.  When frequency was calculated for each floristic segment, both native and nonnative species frequencies changed with respect to study-wide frequency.  Some species were frequent throughout the corridor (B.  emoryi, Tamarix, Bromus rubens), whereas many were only frequent in certain segments (for example, Artemisia ludoviciana, Euthamia occidentalis, Salix exigua, Pluchea sericea, Isocoma acradenia, Alhagi maurorum, Cynodon dactylon, Schedonorus arundinaceus). 



 Foliar Cover The five species with the highest average foliar cover in each river segment differ for randomly selected sites and fixed-site sandbars (figs. 8, 9, 10) .   In Glen and Marble Canyons, the species at randomly selected sites with the highest average cover are Baccharis emoryi, Tamarix, Schedonorus arundinaceus (tall fescue), Bromus diandrus (ripgut brome), and Equisetum x ferrissii; for fixed-site sandbars, Tamarix, B. emoryi, Pluchea sericea, Phragmites australis (common reed), and S. arundinaceus have the highest average cover.  In eastern Grand Canyon, the highest average cover species are Tamarix, B. emoryi, P. sericea, Baccharis salicifolia, and Cynodon dactylon for the randomly selected sites and P. sericea, Tamarix, B. emoryi, Salix exigua (coyote willow), and B. salicifolia for the fixed-site sandbars.  In western Grand Canyon, the highest average cover species are C. dactylon, Baccharis sarothroides, B. emoryi, Tamarix, and Prosopis glandulosa for the randomly selected sites, and C. dactylon, P. sericea, B. emoryi, P. australis, and Tamarix for the fixed-site sandbars. 

 The four nonnative species occurring in the five highest cover value species also show different distributions. 



 EXPLANATION Figure 10 .   Average living foliar cover for the dominant species in western Grand Canyon (river kilometers 259-404), separated by geomorphic feature class.  Species shown consist of the five species with the highest average cover on the randomly selected sites and the five species with the highest average cover on the fixed-site sandbars (note that some species are dominant at both types of sites).  Species names abbreviated as follows: BACEMO, Baccharis emoryi; BACSAR, Baccharis sarothroides; CYNDAC, Cynodon dactylon; PHRAUS, Phragmites australis; PLUSER, Pluchea sericea; PROGLA, Prosopis glandulosa; TAMAR2, Tamarix.  Whiskers extend to the most extreme data point that is not more than 1.5 times the interquartile range (IQR). 

 Table 7 . Mean living foliar cover (as percentage of quadrat) and standard deviations (in parentheses) by river segment and geomorphic feature.  

 [Species listed are one of the top five highest average foliar cover species in at least one river segment of the study area.  River segments are delineated by river kilometers as follows: Glen Canyon and Marble Canyon ("Glen/Marble Canyon"), river kilometers -25 to 97; eastern Grand Canyon ("Eastern GRCA"), river kilometers 97 to 259; western Grand Canyon ("Western GRCA"), river kilometers 259 to 404.] 



 River segment Fixed-site sandbars Randomly selected sites  

 Sandbars  Debris fans Channel margins  Baccharis emoryi Glen/Marble Canyon 2.7 (3.4) 5.4 (4.5) 6.8 (5.5) 6.1 (5.  8 ); its cover is close to zero elsewhere.   Three native Baccharis species have different distributions within the study area.  Baccharis emoryi has high cover across all geomorphic feature classes in Glen and Marble Canyons and at fixed-site sandbars in eastern Grand Canyon and western Grand Canyon, but less cover at randomly selected sites in western Grand Canyon (table 7 ).   Baccharis salicifolia is one of the five highest cover species in only eastern Grand Canyon (fig.  9 ); it has less cover in Glen and Marble Canyons and western Grand Canyon.   Baccharis sarothroides is one of the five highest cover species in western Grand Canyon (fig.  10 ), where it has similar cover across all geomorphic feature classes at randomly selected sites but slightly less cover at fixed-site sandbars.   In Glen and Marble Canyons, however, Baccharis sarothroides has almost no cover and little more in eastern Grand Canyon (table 7 ).  

 Of the other native species, Pluchea sericea and Phragmites australis both have higher cover on fixed-site sandbars than randomly selected sandbars, debris fans, and channel margins (table 7 ).   Pluchea sericea cover is higher in eastern and western Grand Canyon than in Glen and Marble Canyons (table 7 ).   Phragmites australis also has higher cover in western Grand Canyon than elsewhere (table 7).  Salix exigua is one of the five highest cover species on fixed-site sandbars in only eastern Grand Canyon (fig.  9 ), despite having higher average cover on fixed-site sandbars in Glen and Marble Canyons (table  7 ).   Cover values for S. exigua in western Grand Canyon are close to zero.  Prosopis glandulosa cover is greatest in western Grand Canyon. 

 As shown in figure 11 , Glen Canyon has the highest average total foliar cover (29.0±12.2   percent) of all river segments.  Marble Canyon and western Grand Canyon have the next highest average total foliar cover values at 14.0±9.4  percent and 13.8±9.1 percent, respectively, and eastern Grand Canyon has the lowest average total percentage of foliar cover (8.7±6.5 percent) of the four river segments.  Site average total foliar cover is variable within river segments, ranging from 9.3 to 58.1 percent in Glen Canyon, 0.1 to 37.8 percent in Marble Canyon, 0.5 to 36.5 percent in eastern Grand Canyon, and 0.4 to 42.5 percent in western Grand Canyon. 



 Temporal Trends by Hydrologic Zone Statistical results of the mixed-effects models are presented in table 8. Results for each of the response variables are discussed in the following sections. 



 EXPLANATION  Species Richness Total species richness (average number of species per square meter) exhibited significant interaction effects between hydrologic zone and year (table 8 ).   The main effect of hydrologic zone was not significant across the randomly selected sites, but for fixed-site sandbars, hydrologic zone had a much greater effect than year (see difference in F-values in table 8 ).   This difference is largely due to a substantial drop in species richness in the active channel relative to the other hydrologic zones that is observed at fixed-site sandbars but not at randomly selected sites (fig.  12 ).   Species richness in the inactive floodplain and active floodplain was generally lower in 2014 and 2017 than in other years, with the exception of comparably low species richness in the active floodplain of fixed-site sandbars in 2019.  Species richness at randomly selected sites was lowest in 2014; at the fixed-site sandbars, species richness was lowest in 2019. 

 Table 8 .   Generalized linear mixed-effects model results for each of the response variables on randomly selected sites and fixed-site sandbars. 

 [P-values <0.001 are notated as 0. Zone refers to hydrologic zone (active channel, active floodplain, inactive floodplain).  Abbreviations: SS, sum of squares; df, degrees of freedom; F, F-statistics; P, p-value.] 



 Dependent variable Fixed Native species richness exceeded nonnative species richness, on average, across hydrologic zones and years except within the active floodplain and active channel at randomly selected sites in 2014 (fig.  13 ).   The interactive effect of hydrologic zone and year was significant in both datasets, but the main effect of hydrologic zone was stronger in the randomly selected sites dataset.  The year 2014 generally showed a decrease in native species dominance in the randomly selected sites dataset, whereas the fixed-site sandbars dataset was less dominated by native species in 2017 and 2019.  In general, native species dominance was more pronounced at fixed-site sandbars (where it became increasingly pronounced in the active floodplain and active channel) than across randomly selected sites, though the proportion of native species in the active channel did increase through time for the randomly selected sites dataset. 



 Foliar Cover The interactive effect of hydrologic zone and year on total foliar cover was significant in both datasets, where the main effect of hydrologic zone was greater than that of year (table 8).  Cover was lowest in 2014 in the active floodplain and active channel of the randomly selected sites dataset, and lowest in 2019 in the fixed-site sandbars dataset (fig.  14 ).   From 2014 through 2018, cover in the inactive and active floodplains was greater at the fixed-site sandbar sites than at the randomly selected sites, though the reduction in cover on the fixed-site sandbars in 2019 nullified that difference. 

 Native species cover exceeded that of nonnative species, on average, across hydrologic zones and years except within the active floodplain in 2014 and the active channel in 2014 and 2016 for the randomly selected sites dataset (fig.  15 ).   The interactive effect of hydrologic zone and year was significant for the randomly selected sites but not the fixed-site sandbars.  Hydrologic zone had the predominant main effect in the randomly selected sites dataset, whereas year had a stronger main effect in the fixed-site sandbars (table 8 ).   This difference is attributable to the decline in native species dominance from the inactive floodplain to the active channel in the randomly selected sites-a pattern not observed on the fixed-site sandbars.  The fixed-site sandbars exhibited a significant drop in native species dominance in the upper two hydrologic zones in 2017. 



 Species of Interest Tamarix cover showed interactive effects of hydrologic zone and year, though the main effect of year was not significant at the randomly selected sites and was weaker than that of hydrologic zone in the fixed-site sandbars (table 8 ).   Tamarix cover generally decreased from higher to lower elevation hydrologic zones (fig.  16 ); a significant increase in Tamarix cover at the fixed-site sandbars between 2014 and 2016 was nullified in subsequent years by a decline in cover back to 2014 levels.  

 Pluchea sericea cover was consistently greater on the fixed-site sandbars at elevations above the channel (that is, within the inactive floodplain and active floodplain hydrologic zones) than at the randomly selected sites (fig.  17 ).   The interaction between hydrologic zone and year was not significant in either dataset.  The main effect of year was weak in the fixed-site sandbar dataset, driven by a decline in cover in the active channel over time. 

 Hydrologic zone and year had a significant interactive effect in both datasets on the cover of Baccharis species, with hydrologic zone having the stronger main effect (table 8 ).   Baccharis species cover was generally higher in the active floodplain for both datasets, although consistent cover increase in the active channel of the randomly selected sites resulted in comparable cover between the active floodplain and active channel in that dataset by the end of the study period (fig.  18 ).   Baccharis species cover peaked in 2016 in the active floodplain of the fixed-site sandbars but showed no other temporal trends in that dataset. 



 Discussion  Differences Among Sample Sites The community composition and temporal dynamics of fixed-site sandbars differ throughout the study area from those of randomly selected sites, including randomly selected sandbars.  The differences in composition between fixed-site sandbars and randomly selected sandbars may reflect differences in disturbance resulting from visitor use, differential effects of HFE releases, historical or current vegetation management (Ralston and Sarr, 2017 ; U.S. Department of the Interior, 2020), and (or) fundamental differences in grain size or geomorphic settings  (Mueller and others, 2018) .   The results of this study support analyzing data from randomly selected sites (including randomly selected sandbars) and fixed-site sandbars separately for status and trends assessments, as well as maintaining separate monitoring activities for the two types of sites.  Data from randomly selected sites represent the breadth and variability of riparian vegetation across multiple geomorphic features, whereas data from the fixed-site sandbars provide an in-depth look at campsites and eddy sandbars identified as key resources in the Glen Canyon Dam Long-Term Experimental and Management Plan. 

 One of the differences between fixed-site sandbars and randomly selected sites is the prevalence of Pluchea sericea (arrowweed).  This species is notably higher in cover and frequency on fixed-site sandbars and is especially prevalent in Grand Canyon.  Because of its affinity for growing at popular campsites, P. sericea has been implicated in the reduction of available campsite area within the study area (Hadley and others, 2018) and is now being targeted for removal from a few fixed-site sandbars and other campsites as part of the Glen Canyon Dam Adaptive Management Program triennial budget and work plan (U.S.   Department of the Interior, 2020).  Grand Canyon National Park staff are coordinating with GCMRC and Northern Arizona University scientists to implement non-flow-related experimental vegetation treatments to assess if and how vegetation removal at key sandbars can increase usable campsite area and facilitate aeolian transport of sand to upland dunes.  The fixed-site sandbars included in these efforts in 2019 were Basalt Camp and 122 Mile Camp (Palmquist and others, 2018b) .   The clonal habit, high salinity tolerance (Vandersande and others, 2001) , and rapid resprouting capabilities (Busch and Smith, 1993) of P. sericea make the species well suited for growing on highly disturbed sand deposits as well as in conjunction with-or following mortality of-Tamarix stands.   HFE releases are designed to deposit sand on eddy sandbars with the goal of creating large, open sand deposits, and fixed-site sandbars are known to change rapidly in volume depending on flow patterns (Mueller and others, 2014) .   At the same time, Tamarix stands in the study area are being defoliated as a result of the tamarisk beetle (Diorhabda carinulata; Bedford and others, 2018), and P. sericea commonly grows with living and dying Tamarix (Busch and Smith, 1995;  Hadley and others, 2018;  González and others, 2020) .   Conditions in the study area appear to be conducive to P. sericea occupancy, particularly on sandbars.  It is anticipated, then, that this species will continue to do well in the study area. 



 Geographic Patterns Floristic patterns documented in 2014 in randomly selected sites (Palmquist and others, 2018a) remained clearly delineated across years and with more intensive sampling.   Sampling in the Glen Canyon river segment has now shown that randomly selected sites in Glen Canyon are floristically similar to randomly selected sites in Marble Canyon, although they are compositionally different.  Glen Canyon has higher frequencies of plant species that are either absent or rare in other parts of the study area, such as Sisyrinchium demissum (blue-eyed grass), Juncus torreyi (desert olive), Juncus arcticus (arctic rush), Mentha arvensis (wild mint), Epipactis gigantea (stream orchid), Plantago lanceolata (narrowleaf plantain), and Epilobium ciliatum (fringed willowherb; see app. 1).  These (and similar) species reflect a greater presence of flood-tolerant fluvial marsh species in Glen Canyon relative to the rest of the study area.  Glen Canyon also has higher overall foliar cover values than the rest of the study area.  These qualities (greater presence of fluvial marsh species and high foliar cover) may be the result of daily hydropower waves and a lack of suspended sediment within the river segment, factors which together produce daily inundations of very clear water that provide light and water to flood-tolerant species (Blindow and others, 1993) .   Because of its short length, the Glen Canyon river segment has a small annual sample size (consisting of approximately six randomly selected sites and one fixed-site sandbar), and data from this segment must therefore be grouped with data from the neighboring Marble Canyon river segment for some status and trend analyses. 

 The floristic associations that currently exist are not necessarily static through time.  As climate, dam operations, and tributary flow patterns change, it is likely that species distributions along the Colorado River will also change (Capon and others, 2013;  McShane and others, 2015;  Perry and others, 2015) .   The current floristic groups may remain similar but shift geographically.  For example, the desert riparian community in Grand Canyon may become more prevalent in Marble Canyon over time.  Alternatively, novel floristic groups may emerge as individual species respond independently to environmental changes on the basis of their specific physiological traits and niche preferences (Hobbs and others, 2006;  Catford and others, 2013) .   Because different vegetation types differentially influence sediment deposition (Butterfield and others, 2020), drive community level functional traits (McCoy-Sulentic and others, 2017a) , and respond to hydrologic and climatic variables  (Butterfield and others, 2018) , it is important to track shifts in riparian vegetation communities over time.  

 Total riparian vegetation cover is variable across and within segments.  Narrow sections of Grand Canyon tend to have lower total vegetated area, as illustrated by Sankey and others (2015) , but a lack of habitable area should not be reflected in the total cover estimates provided in this report.   The sampled area (comprising no more than twenty-seven 1-m 2 quadrats) is similar for all randomly selected sites, and quadrats are arranged based on the width of the hydrologic zones; therefore, a site that is 50-m wide can have a similar total foliar cover estimate as a site that is 10-m wide.  The reduced total foliar cover exhibited in eastern Grand Canyon, then, is likely due to other contributing factors such as increased shading from canyon walls, increased flow velocity due to a narrower channel, coarser soil components (in other words, soil containing more gravels and rock), and so on.  These same factors may be related to the high variability in total vegetation cover throughout the canyon, indicating strong interactions between river flows and other environmental variables (Bendix, 1994a;  Butterfield and others, 2018;  Butterfield and others, 2020) .   To predict vegetation response to flows and increase vegetation restoration success, it is important to better understand how river flows and other environmental variables jointly influence plant species in the study area. 



 Temporal Dynamics The indicators used to assess management goals within Grand Canyon have demonstrated few directional changes from 2014 to 2019, with observed trends primarily occurring within the area influenced by daily dam operations (that is, within the active channel).  Some fluctuations in vegetation status can be attributed to interannual climatic variation (discussed below), but for some temporal variations in species of interest (for example, the 2016 Baccharis and Tamarix peak in the active floodplain of sandbars), the drivers are less evident.  The status and trends herein provide a baseline of interannual variation against which future monitoring can be compared.  The annual timesteps of the monitoring data illustrate that collecting data less frequently (for example, every other year) would make it more difficult to detect trends or be confident that observed patterns indicate trends in vegetation change.  Additionally, less frequent sampling could miss nonlinear responses to unique changes in dam operations (such as flows designed for trout management and HFE releases). 

 In general, vegetation status and dynamics at randomly selected sites differed from those at fixed-site sandbars, indicating that different processes regulate vegetation in these different geomorphic settings.  For example, species richness is lower in the active channel of fixed-site sandbars than in the active channel of randomly selected sites.  Another example is that Baccharis species are increasing in the active channel of randomly selected sites but not in the active channel of fixedsite sandbars.  These results imply that different management strategies may be necessary to obtain vegetation and recreation resource goals in these different settings. 

 Species diversity and total foliar cover showed temporal patterns in the active channel that were consistent with the overriding influence of river flows (rather than climate variability) on vegetation affected by daily fluctuations.  Species richness, cover, and native species dominance increased over time in the active channel across randomly selected sites; whereas in the active channel of fixed-site sandbars, species richness and cover both decreased slightly over time, and native species dominance did not change.  The increase in native species dominance across randomly selected sites reflects a shift from nonnative species dominance in 2014, and native species dominance at randomly selected sites has begun to converge on the higher level of native species dominance that has been consistently observed in the active channel of the fixed-site sandbars.  This increase in native species dominance, as well as the overall increase in species richness and cover across randomly selected sites, likely reflects the consistent flow regime and low intensity of disturbance over the study period, which has allowed establishment and expansion of more native species in the active channel.  The increased prevalence of large native shrubs in the genus Baccharis is emblematic of this change. 

 The opposite pattern of declining species richness and cover in the fixed-site sandbars may reflect the combined impacts of hydrological and climatic factors.  The lower species richness and cover of 2019 largely drove this trend, which is consistent with the combination of a HFE in the fall of 2018 and virtually no monsoon precipitation in 2019.  The reduction in species richness is unlikely to be related to vegetation removals conducted by the National Park Service at the Basalt Camp and 122 Mile Camp fixed-site sandbars in 2019 (U.S.  Department of the Interior, 2017).  Encroaching Pluchea sericea was removed to increase usable camping area and facilitate increased transport of windblown sand to upland areas.  Because of the limited number of sites affected, the relatively small extent of areas cleared, the few species removed, and the notable lack of change in cover of the targeted species (P.  sericea), it is most probable that the fall 2018 HFE and the dry 2019 monsoon season are jointly related to the lower species richness and cover observed in 2019. 

 The active floodplain and inactive floodplain exhibited greater sensitivity to interannual climate variability, though species richness and vegetation cover appeared to be responsive to different aspects of precipitation.  Species richness was generally lowest in 2014 and 2018, the years with the lowest total annual precipitation.  Vegetation cover was lowest in 2014 and 2019; the latter year, though not particularly dry in terms of total annual precipitation, had one of the driest monsoon seasons in decades.  In contrast, although 2018 was dry in terms of total annual precipitation, that year's monsoon season was close to average.  These differing patterns are consistent with the influence of herbaceous, often annual species that make up a large proportion of the species pool but contribute less than woody vegetation to total ecosystem productivity.  The apparent effect of a relatively dry 2019 monsoon suggests that vegetation productivity is constrained by warm-season precipitation.  The fixed-site sandbars, which in normal years had generally higher vegetation cover than the randomly selected sites, seem to have been particularly sensitive to the dry monsoon season in 2019.  This apparent sensitivity could reflect the higher initial vegetative cover of fixed-site sandbars, which could have resulted in more intense competition in 2019, or it could reflect that the fixed-site sandbars experience more severe water deficits under dry conditions because of their typically coarse substrates. 

 Some species of interest appeared to exhibit sensitivity to monsoon precipitation, though the evidence is weak and may be conflated with effects of HFE frequency.  Baccharis and Tamarix had peak cover in 2016 in the active floodplain (and Tamarix in the inactive floodplain) of fixed-site sandbars.  Pluchea sericea had a minor increase in cover that year, as well, though it was not significantly different than other years.  Precipitation during the 2016 monsoon was high following an average precipitation winter and spring, which may account for these increases in cover but does not account for these anomalies not being observable across the randomly selected sites.  Another possibility is that the lack of a HFE in 2015 allowed these woody plants to expand on the less stable sandbar surfaces, though a similar response was not seen in 2018 after the lack of a HFE in 2017.  Regardless, the fact that this anomaly was only observed on the fixed-site sandbars suggests an influence of either substrate type, sandbar reconfiguration, or both.  The amount and quality of active floodplain and inactive floodplain habitat could have been quite different in 2016 because of HFE releases in the three consecutive years from 2012 to 2014.  Further investigation of the effects of HFE releases on species of interest in terms of habitat quality and lag effects are warranted. 

 Riparian vegetation in the study area is expected to increase over time because habitat is still available and base flows are anticipated to remain stable (Sankey and others, 2015;  Kasprak and others, 2018;  Kasprak and others, 2021) .   In an evaluation of riparian vegetation expansion between 2002 and 2013, Durning and others (2021) showed that most encroachment occurred between 2002 and 2009 and that the years from 2009 to 2013 were characterized by less encroachment by a smaller set of species.   During the timeframe analyzed here (2014-2019), foliar cover does not appear to be increasing, suggesting that the slower rate of encroachment that Durning and others (2021) noted from 2009 to 2013 is continuing.   The exception to this trend is the increasing Baccharis spp.  cover in the active channel.  Durning and others (2021) also found that Baccharis species were one of the primary contributors to recent vegetation encroachment, so this pattern of growth is also continuing.  It is likely that Baccharis species are driving the greater proportion of native species in the active channel.  Baccharis emoryi is high in cover across all geomorphic features and is the only native species with cover estimates approaching those of nonnative Tamarix and Cynodon dactylon.  Baccharis sarothroides is also a large contributor to vegetation cover in western Grand Canyon.  Although P. sericea is a major contributor to vegetation cover on fixed-site sandbars, its cover did not increase from 2014 to 2019.  Vegetation increases in the past have not proceeded consistently across years, space, or species in the study area and are related to river flows, geomorphology, and climate (Carothers and others, 1976;  Brian, 1982;  Sankey and others, 2015;  Butterfield and others, 2018;  Mueller and others, 2018;  Butterfield and others, 2020;  Durning and others, 2021) .   Determining the flow patterns that lead to one species increasing in cover and (or) frequency while the cover and frequency of others remain the same would improve our abilities to predict the trajectory of riparian vegetation change and help define useful management actions. 

 The riparian area of the Colorado River between Glen Canyon Dam and Lake Mead is currently undergoing a visible change in its native to nonnative species ratio.  Diorhabda carinulata (tamarisk beetle) has been present in the ecosystem since at least 2009 and, as of 2013, affected approximately 15 percent of Tamarix (Bedford and others, 2018) .   Over the timeframe covered here, monitoring efforts have not recorded significant decreases in living Tamarix cover, despite observable defoliation events.  In this study, defoliated and fully healthy Tamarix are recorded similarly, so only tree mortality would be observable.  Repeated defoliation events weaken Tamarix and can eventually result in tree mortality, but limb loss and resource depletion occur first (Bean and Dudley, 2018) .   Thus, considering 85 percent of Tamarix had not been affected by the tamarisk beetle in 2013, it is likely that Tamarix mortality is not yet recordable.  The efforts of this monitoring protocol (which records dead Tamarix; Palmquist and others, 2018b) and periodic overflights (which can successfully track Tamarix defoliation and mortality;  Bedford and others, 2018) are together expected to be able to track the effects of the tamarisk beetle on Tamarix cover over time.  

 The metrics used to track key riparian vegetation qualities (species richness, native to nonnative species ratio, total foliar cover) are promising for tracking management goals in the face of changing climate and flow conditions.  These metrics are not dependent upon specific species and compositions; rather, they are simply related to the total number of species, the number of native species, and areal cover.  The apparent lack of importance of both geomorphic feature and floristic region in the mixed-effects models of vegetation metrics (species richness, native to nonnative species ratio, total foliar cover) means that they can be evaluated across the entire study area (and thus do not require that the study area be divided into multiple river segments).  Any future species distribution shifts will not necessarily change the outcome of these metrics, so values will be comparable over time.  Shifts in species richness, native to nonnative species ratios, and total foliar cover can indicate if species are being lost over time, if nonnative species are predominating, or if total vegetation cover is declining or increasing.  Although species composition is important because of the ecosystem services provided by specific species, measures of species richness, native to nonnative species ratios, and total foliar cover can provide a simple assessment of vegetation status that is useful for assessing the state of riparian vegetation along the Colorado River between Glen Canyon Dam and Lake Mead over time.  Bendix, J., 1994a, Among-site variation in riparian vegetation of the southern California Transverse Ranges: American Midland Naturalist, v. 132, no.  [River segments are delineated by river kilometers as follows: Glen Canyon, river kilometers -25 to 0; Marble Canyon, river kilometers 0 to 97; eastern Grand Canyon ("Eastern GRCA"), river kilometers 97 to 259; western Grand Canyon ("Western GRCA"), river kilometers 259 to 404.] Table 2 .1.   Family, scientific name, common name, growth form, native status, and number of sites at which each species has been recorded in the study area and within floristic segments. 



 Family [River segments are delineated by river kilometers as follows: Glen Canyon, river kilometers -25 to 0; Marble Canyon, river kilometers 0 to 97; eastern Grand Canyon ("Eastern GRCA"), river kilometers 97 to 259; western Grand Canyon ("Western GRCA"), river kilometers 259 to 404.] 



 Family  Figures 1 .Tables 1 . 11  Figures 1. Map of the Colorado River from Glen Canyon Dam to the high-water inflow of Lake Mead .....................................................................................................................................4 2. Aerial photograph showing examples of the generalized feature classes that form the geomorphic template of the Colorado River within the study area ......................5 3. Hydrograph of the Colorado River from 1921 to present, as recorded at Lees Ferry, Arizona .................................................................................................................................6 4. Hydrograph showing hourly discharge data for the Colorado River at Lees Ferry, Arizona, from January 1, 2014, to December 31, 2019 .................................................7 



   Figure 1 . 1  Figure 1.  Map of the Colorado River between Glen Canyon Dam and the high-water inflow of Lake Mead, with eight tributaries identified.  The river corridor is divided into four segments (shown in different shades of gray) that relate to geography and floristic patterns: the Glen Canyon segment, spanning from Glen Canyon Dam to Lees Ferry (river kilometers [Rkm] -25-0); the Marble Canyon segment, spanning from Lees Ferry to the Little Colorado River (Rkm 0-97); the eastern Grand Canyon segment, spanning from the Little Colorado River to National Canyon (Rkm 97-259); and the western Grand Canyon segment, spanning from National Canyon to the high-water inflow of Lake Mead (Rkm 259-404).  Fixed-site sandbar locations are indicated by blue hexagons. 



   Figure 2 . 2  Figure 2. Aerial photograph showing examples of the generalized feature classes (debris fan, sandbar, and channel margin) that form the geomorphic template of the Colorado River within the study area.  Debris fans are cone-shaped, coarse-grained sediment deposits emanating from tributaries, and sandbars are fine-grained deposits that form upstream and downstream from debris fans; the channel margin feature class encompasses all other shorelines.  Hydrologic zones related to Glen Canyon Dam operations (active channel, active floodplain, and inactive floodplain) are also depicted.  The active channel is the area inundated by daily flow fluctuations (discharges of 707 cubic meters per second [m 3 /s] or less); the active floodplain is the area flooded by high flow experiments (discharges between 707 and 1,274 m 3 /s); and the inactive floodplain, which is rarely flooded under current dam operations, is the area inundated by discharges of more than 1,274 m 3 /s.  White arrows indicate the direction of flow.  Base image from Durning and others (2016). 



     Figure 3 . 3  Figure 3. Hydrograph of the Colorado River from 1921 to present, as recorded at Lees Ferry, Arizona.  Notable changes in dam operations are indicated.  MLFF, Modified Low Fluctuating Flow; HFE, high flow experiment; m 3 /s, cubic meters per second. 



     Figure 4 . 4  Figure 4. Hydrograph showing hourly discharge data for the Colorado River at Lees Ferry, Arizona, from January 1, 2014, to December 31, 2019.  High flow experiment (HFE) releases are labeled (for example, "2014 HFE").  Red dashed lines indicate discharge levels from Glen Canyon Dam that are used by this study to delineate three hydrologic zones (active channel, active floodplain, and inactive floodplain) on the basis of inundation frequency.  Red arrows indicate the range of discharge levels associated with each hydrologic zone.  Active channel is defined as the area inundated by daily fluctuating flows that range up to 708 cubic meters per second [m 3 /s].  Active floodplain is defined as the area inundated by HFE releases (that is, by discharges between 708 and 1,274 m 3 /s).  Inactive floodplain is defined as the area within the historical high-water line that is no longer inundated by planned dam releases.  Light blue dashed line represents the minimum daytime flow (227 m 3 /s) from Glen Canyon Dam under the Long-Term Experimental and Management Plan record of decision (U.S.  Department of the Interior, 2016). 



     Figure 5 . 5  Figure 5. Mean monthly temperature (shown as red line) and monthly total precipitation (shown as gray bars) during the study period, as measured at meteorological stations at Lees Ferry, Phantom Ranch, and near the confluence of the Colorado River and Diamond Creek (labeled as "Diamond Creek" in figure), Arizona.  Dash-dot and solid vertical lines indicate sampling events for randomly selected sites and fixed-site sandbars, respectively. 



     Figure 6.  Diagram illustrating the sampling layout for randomly selected sites.  Three transects are placed perpendicular to the river channel, and nine 1-square-meter (m 2 ) sample quadrats (illustrated as red squares, not shown to scale) are placed on each transect.  Quadrats are stratified by hydrologic zone (active channel, active floodplain, and inactive floodplain).  Base image from Durning and others (2016). 



     Figure 11 . 11  Figure11.  Average total foliar cover (as percentage of quadrat) for randomly selected sites by river kilometer.  Sample year is indicated by point shape.  River segments (indicated by color) are defined as follows: Glen Canyon, river kilometers (Rkm) -25 to 0; Marble Canyon, Rkm 0 to 97; eastern Grand Canyon, Rkm 97 to 259; western Grand Canyon, Rkm 259 to 404. 



   Figure 12 . 12  Figure 12.  Fitted-model estimates for total species richness across hydrologic zones (active channel shown in blue; active floodplain shown in green; inactive floodplain shown in orange).  Different lowercase letters indicate significant differences at α = 0.05 based on Tukey's post-hoc comparisons. 



   Figure 13 . 13  Figure 13.  Fitted-model estimates for the proportion of native versus nonnative species richness across hydrologic zones (active channel shown in blue; active floodplain shown in green; inactive floodplain shown in orange).  Different lowercase letters indicate significant differences at α = 0.05 based on Tukey's post-hoc comparisons. 



   Figure 14 . 14  Figure 14.  Fitted-model estimates for total vegetation cover across hydrologic zones (active channel shown in blue; active floodplain shown in green; inactive floodplain shown in orange).  Different lowercase letters indicate significant differences at α = 0.05 based on Tukey's post-hoc comparisons. 



   Figure 15 .Figure 16 . 1516  Figure 15.  Fitted-model estimates for the proportion of native versus nonnative species cover across hydrologic zones (active channel shown in blue; active floodplain shown in green; inactive floodplain shown in orange).  Different lowercase letters indicate significant differences at α = 0.05 based on Tukey's post-hoc comparisons. 



   Figure 17 .Figure 18 . 1718  Figure 17.  Fitted-model estimates for Pluchea sericea (arrowweed) cover across hydrologic zones (active channel shown in blue; active floodplain shown in green; inactive floodplain shown in orange).  Different lowercase letters indicate significant differences at α = 0.05 based on Tukey's post-hoc comparisons. 



   Table 1 . 1 . 11  Family, scientific name, common name, growth form, native status, and number of sites at which each species has been recorded in the study area and within floristic segments.-Continued  [River segments are delineated by river kilometers as follows: Glen Canyon, river kilometers -25 to 0; Marble Canyon, river kilometers 0 to 97; eastern Grand Canyon ("Eastern GRCA"), river kilometers 97 to 259; western Grand Canyon ("Western GRCA"), river kilometers 259 to 404.] 



   Table 1 . 1 . 11  Family, scientific name, common name, growth form, native status, and number of sites at which each species has been recorded in the study area and within floristic segments.-Continued  [River segments are delineated by river kilometers as follows: Glen Canyon, river kilometers -25 to 0; Marble Canyon, river kilometers 0 to 97; eastern Grand Canyon ("Eastern GRCA"), river kilometers 97 to 259; western Grand Canyon ("Western GRCA"), river kilometers 259 to 404.] 



   Table 2 . 1 .Table 2 . 1 .Table 2 . 1 . 212121  Family, scientific name, common name, growth form, native status, and number of sites at which each species has been recorded in the study area and within floristic segments.-Continued  [River segments are delineated by river kilometers as follows: Glen Canyon, river kilometers -25 to 0; Marble Canyon, river kilometers 0 to 97; eastern Grand Canyon ("Eastern GRCA"), river kilometers 97 to 259; western Grand Canyon ("Western GRCA"), river kilometers 259 to 404.] Family, scientific name, common name, growth form, native status, and number of sites at which each species has been recorded in the study area and within floristic segments.-Continued  [River segments are delineated by river kilometers as follows: Glen Canyon, river kilometers -25 to 0; Marble Canyon, river kilometers 0 to 97; eastern Grand Canyon ("Eastern GRCA"), river kilometers 97 to 259; western Grand Canyon ("Western GRCA"), river kilometers 259 to 404.] Family, scientific name, common name, growth form, native status, and number of sites at which each species has been recorded in the study area and within floristic segments.-Continued  [River segments are delineated by river kilometers as follows: Glen Canyon, river kilometers -25 to 0; Marble Canyon, river kilometers 0 to 97; eastern Grand Canyon ("Eastern GRCA"), river kilometers 97 to 259; western Grand Canyon ("Western GRCA"), river kilometers 259 to 404.] 



     .....21         vii   Conversion Factors       U.S. customary units to International System of Units       Multiply  By  To obtain   foot (ft)  0.3048  meter (m)   mile (mi)  1.609  kilometer (km)   yard (yd)  0.9144  meter (m)   acre-foot per day (acre-ft/d)  0.01427  cubic meter per second (m 3 )   cubic foot per second (ft 3 )  0.02832  cubic meter per second (m 3 )   million gallons per day (Mgal/d)  0.04381  cubic meter per second (m 3 )   International System of Units to U.S. customary units       Multiply  By  To obtain   meter (m)  3.281  foot (ft)   kilometer (km)  0.6214  mile (mi)   meter (m)  1.094  yard (yd)   cubic meter per second (m 3 )  70.07  acre-foot per day (acre-ft/d)   cubic meter per second (m 3 )  35.31  cubic foot per second (ft 3 )   cubic meter per second (m 3 )  22.83  million gallons per day (Mgal/d)  

  Table 2 . 2  Number of randomly selected channel margin (CM), debris fan (DF), and sandbar (SB) sites and fixed-site sandbars for each river segment, with randomly selected sites further divided into years. 



  Dataset      2012  2013  2014    2015  2016  2017    2018  2019   Glen Canyon random      0    0  0    6  7  6    6  7   Marble Canyon random      0  Pilot  25    0  21  25    25  25   Eastern GRCA random      0  Pilot  32    0  29  25    36  36   Western GRCA random      0  Pilot  39    0  32  32    31  34   Fixed-site sandbars      Pilot    42  42    43  43  43    43  42   [Number of fixed-site sandbars ("Fixed-site SB") within each river segment are not separated by year or geomorphic feature class because these sites are   sampled annually and are all sandbars. River segments are delineated by river kilometers as follows: Glen Canyon, river kilometers -25 to 0; Marble Canyon,   river kilometers 0 to 97; eastern Grand Canyon ("Eastern GRCA"), river kilometers 97 to 259; western Grand Canyon ("Western GRCA"), river kilometers 259   to 404.]                           Dataset  CM  Glen Canyon DF  SB  CM  Marble Canyon DF  SB  CM  Eastern GRCA DF  SB  CM  Western GRCA DF  SB   2014  0  0  0  11  7    7  16  10  6  17  11  11   2016  2  3  2  7  6    8  8  9  12  13  14  5   2017  2  2  2  9  7    9  10  10  5  11  11  10   2018  2  2  2  7  9    9  13  10  13  9  10  12   2019  2  2  3  7  9    9  12  12  12  10  13  11   Total  8  9  9  41  38    42  59  51  48  60  59  49  

  Channel margin Debris fans Randomly selected sandbar Fixed-site sandbar EXPLANATION Glen Canyon Marble Canyon Eastern Grand Canyon Western Grand Canyon EXPLANATION     A              B              Figure 7. Detrended                               correspondence                               analysis scores for                               all monitoring sites                               during the study period,                               grouped by geomorphic   DCA 2                            feature class (A), river segment (B), hydrologic zone (C), and sampling                               year (D) data classes.                               Crosses indicate mean                               scores ±2 standard                               errors for each data                               class. Symbols in                               explanation are                               enlarged by four times   C          EXPLANATION  D          EXPLANATION  their size in the graph. DCA 1, detrended             IF              2014    correspondence             AF AC              2016 2017 2018    analysis 1; DCA 2, detrended                           2019    correspondence                               analysis 2; AC, active   DCA 2                            channel; AF, active floodplain; IF, inactive floodplain.   0  1  2  3  4  5  6  0  1  2  3  4  5  6         DCA 1              DCA 1        

  Table 3 . 3  The 10 most frequently recorded native plant species at randomly selected sites for the entire study area and for each river segment.River segments are delineated by river kilometers as follows: Glen Canyon, river kilometers -25 to 0; Marble Canyon, river kilometers 0 to 97; eastern Grand Canyon, river kilometers 97 to 259; western Grand Canyon, river kilometers 259 to404.] 



  Scientific name  Common name  Growth form  Relative frequency     Entire study area       Baccharis emoryi  Emory's baccharis  Shrub  0.64   Equisetum x ferrissii  horsetail  Forb  0.54   Sporobolus flexuosus  mesa dropseed  Graminoid  0.45   Aristida purpurea  purple threeawn  Graminoid  0.42   Euthamia occidentalis  western goldentop  Forb  0.37   Bothriochloa barbinodis  cane bluestem  Graminoid  0.33   Brickellia longifolia  longleaf brickellbush  Shrub  0.32   Artemisia ludoviciana  white sagebrush  Forb  0.32   Baccharis sarothroides  desertbroom  Shrub  0.31   Pluchea sericea  arrowweed  Shrub  0.30     Glen Canyon       Artemisia ludoviciana  white sagebrush  Forb  0.92   Baccharis emoryi  Emory's baccharis  Shrub  0.88   Euthamia occidentalis  western goldentop  Forb  0.88   Equisetum x ferrissii  horsetail  Forb  0.77   Salix exigua  Coyote willow  Shrub  0.77   Carex emoryi  Emory's sedge  Sedge  0.58   Chloracantha spinosa  spiny chloracantha  Forb  0.58   Muhlenbergia asperifolia  scratchgrass  Graminoid  0.58   Mentha arvensis  wild mint  Forb  0.46   Sporobolus flexuosus  mesa dropseed  Graminoid  0.46     Marble Canyon       Baccharis emoryi  Emory's baccharis  Shrub  0.93   Equisetum x ferrissii  horsetail  Forb  0.80   Artemisia ludoviciana  white sagebrush  Forb  0.73   Euthamia occidentalis  western goldentop  Forb  0.65   Brickellia longifolia  longleaf brickellbush  Shrub  0.56  

 [     Table 3 . 3  The 10 most frequently recorded native plant species at randomly selected sites for the entire study area and for each river segment.-Continued[River  segments are delineated by river kilometers as follows: Glen Canyon, river kilometers -25 to 0; Marble Canyon, river kilometers 0 to 97; eastern Grand Canyon, river kilometers 97 to 259; western Grand Canyon, river kilometers 259 to404.] 



  Scientific name  Common name  Growth form  Relative frequency     Marble Canyon-Continued       Sporobolus flexuosus  mesa dropseed  Graminoid  0.52   Salix exigua  coyote willow  Shrub  0.47   Muhlenbergia asperifolia  scratchgrass  Graminoid  0.46   Chloracantha spinosa  spiny chloracantha  Forb  0.42   Aristida purpurea  purple threeawn  Graminoid  0.38     Eastern Grand Canyon       Baccharis emoryi  Emory's baccharis  Shrub  0.52   Aristida purpurea  purple threeawn  Graminoid  0.51   Sporobolus flexuosus  mesa dropseed  Graminoid  0.47   Baccharis salicifolia  mule-fat  Shrub  0.42   Bothriochloa barbinodis  cane bluestem  Graminoid  0.42   Brickellia longifolia  longleaf brickellbush  Shrub  0.39   Aristida arizonica  Arizona threeawn  Graminoid  0.38   Isocoma acradenia  alkali goldenbush  Shrub  0.37   Sporobolus spp.  dropseed  Graminoid  0.35   Senegalia greggii  catclaw acacia  Tree  0.34     Western Grand Canyon       Baccharis sarothroides  desertbroom  Shrub  0.74   Equisetum x ferrissii  horsetail  Forb  0.55   Baccharis emoryi  Emory's baccharis  Shrub  0.50   Isocoma acradenia  alkali goldenbush  Shrub  0.43   Aristida purpurea  purple threeawn  Graminoid  0.41   Pluchea sericea  arrowweed  Shrub  0.41   Senegalia greggii  catclaw acacia  Tree  0.39   Bothriochloa barbinodis  cane bluestem  Graminoid  0.38   Sporobolus flexuosus  mesa dropseed  Graminoid  0.38   Baccharis salicifolia  mule-fat  Shrub  0.34  

  Table 4 . 4  The 10 most frequently recorded native plant species at fixed-site sandbars for the entire study area. 



  Scientific name  Common name  Growth form  Relative frequency   Baccharis emoryi  Emory's baccharis  Shrub  0.93   Sporobolus flexuosus  mesa dropseed  Graminoid  0.91   Equisetum x ferrissii  horsetail  Forb  0.70   Sporobolus cryptandrus  sand dropseed  Graminoid  0.70   Euthamia occidentalis  western goldentop  Forb  0.65   Salix exigua  coyote willow  Shrub  0.63   Sporobolus spp.  dropseed  Graminoid  0.63   Sporobolus contractus  spike dropseed  Shrub  0.60   Muhlenbergia asperifolia  scratchgrass  Graminoid  0.58   Pluchea sericea  arrowweed  Shrub  0.58  

  Table 5 . 5  The 10 most frequently recorded nonnative plant species at randomly selected sites for the entire study area and for each river segment.[Riversegments  are delineated by river kilometers as follows: Glen Canyon, river kilometers -25 to 0; Marble Canyon, river kilometers 0 to 97; eastern Grand Canyon, river kilometers 97 to 259; western Grand Canyon, river kilometers 259 to404.] 



  Scientific name  Common name  Growth form  Relative frequency     Entire study area       Bromus rubens  red brome  Graminoid  0.74   Tamarix  salt cedar  Tree  0.62   Cynodon dactylon  Bermudagrass  Graminoid  0.51   Bromus diandrus  ripgut brome  Graminoid  0.45   Schedonorus arundinaceus  tall fescue  Graminoid  0.33   Alhagi maurorum  camelthorn  Forb  0.27   Conyza canadensis  Canadian horseweed  Forb  0.23   Agrostis stolonifera  creeping bentgrass  Graminoid  0.23   Melilotus officinalis  sweetclover  Forb  0.22   Polypogon viridis  beardless rabbitsfoot grass  Graminoid  0.17     Glen Canyon       Schedonorus arundinaceus  tall fescue  Graminoid  1.00   Bromus rubens  red brome  Graminoid  0.92   Tamarix  salt cedar  Tree  0.85   Agrostis gigantea  redtop  Graminoid  0.81   Bromus diandrus  ripgut brome  Graminoid  0.81   Plantago lanceolata  narrowleaf plantain  Forb  0.81   Melilotus officinalis  sweetclover  Forb  0.46   Agrostis stolonifera  creeping bentgrass  Graminoid  0.38   Taraxacum officinale  common dandelion  Forb  0.23   Bromus tectorum  cheatgrass  Graminoid  0.19     Marble Canyon       Bromus rubens  red brome  Graminoid  0.79   Schedonorus arundinaceus  tall fescue  Graminoid  0.78   Tamarix  salt cedar  Tree  0.73   Agrostis stolonifera  creeping bentgrass  Graminoid  0.60   Bromus diandrus  ripgut brome  Graminoid  0.59   Polypogon viridis  beardless rabbitsfoot grass  Graminoid  0.37   Conyza canadensis  Canadian horseweed  Forb  0.26   Salsola tragus  prickly Russian thistle  Forb  0.24   Melilotus officinalis  sweetclover  Forb  0.21   Poa pratensis  Kentucky bluegrass  Graminoid  0.18     Eastern Grand Canyon       Bromus rubens  red brome  Graminoid  0.75   Tamarix  salt cedar  Tree  0.58   Cynodon dactylon  Bermudagrass  Graminoid  0.46   Alhagi maurorum  camelthorn  Forb  0.39   Bromus diandrus  ripgut brome  Graminoid  0.28   Conyza canadensis  Canadian horseweed  Forb  0.20   Salsola tragus  prickly Russian thistle  Forb  0.18  

  Table 5 . 5  The 10 most frequently recorded nonnative plant species at randomly selected sites for the entire study area and for each river segment.-Continued[River  segments are delineated by river kilometers as follows: Glen Canyon, river kilometers -25 to 0; Marble Canyon, river kilometers 0 to 97; eastern Grand Canyon, river kilometers 97 to 259; western Grand Canyon, river kilometers 259 to404.] 



  Scientific name  Common name  Growth form  Relative frequency     Eastern Grand Canyon-Continued       Polypogon viridis  beardless rabbitsfoot grass  Graminoid  0.13   Schedonorus arundinaceus  tall fescue  Graminoid  0.13   Melilotus officinalis  sweetclover  Forb  0.12     Western Grand Canyon       Cynodon dactylon  Bermudagrass  Graminoid  0.98   Bromus rubens  red brome  Graminoid  0.66   Tamarix  salt cedar  Tree  0.54   Bromus diandrus  ripgut brome  Graminoid  0.44   Alhagi maurorum  camelthorn  Forb  0.39   Piptatherum miliaceum  smilograss  Graminoid  0.38   Melilotus officinalis  sweetclover  Forb  0.28   Conyza canadensis  Canadian horseweed  Forb  0.27   Schedonorus arundinaceus  tall fescue  Graminoid  0.10   Polypogon monspeliensis  annual rabbitsfoot grass  Graminoid  0.10  

  Table 6 . 6  The 10 most frequently recorded nonnative plant species at fixed-site sandbars for the entire study area. 



     Eastern Grand Canyon Outlier 1.5x IQR 75 th percentile 50 th percentile (median) 25 th percentile 1.5x IQR Geomorphic feature class   Tamarix has high living cover across all river segments and geomorphic features as compared to all the other species(table 7, figs.8, 9, 10).Cynodon dactylon cover is close to zero in Glen and Marble Canyons, greater in eastern Grand Canyon, and high in western Grand Canyon, with little variation among geomorphic features in any segment (table7).  Schedonorus arundinaceus and Bromus diandrus 



    EXPLANATION           Outlier  Geomorphic feature       0 10 20 30 40 10 20 30 Average living foliar cover (as percentage of quadrat) Average living foliar cover (as percentage of quadrat)  BACEMO 1.5x IQR 75 th percentile 50 th percentile (median) 25 th percentile 1.5x IQR  BRODIA  EQUFER Fixed-site sandbar class Randomly selected sandbar Debris fan Channel margin  PHRAUS Species  PLUSER  SCHARU Glen and Marble Canyons TAMAR2   0                 BACEMO  BACSAR  CYNDAC  PHRAUS  PLUSER  PROGLA  TAMAR2             Species     Scientific name      Common name  Growth form  Relative frequency   Bromus rubens      red brome    Graminoid  1.00   Tamarix      saltcedar    Tree  0.98   Bromus diandrus Bromus spp. Polypogon viridis Salsola tragus Conyza canadensis Schedonorus arundinaceus Schismus arabicus Cynodon dactylon 10 20 30 Average living foliar cover (as percentage of quadrat)    ripgut brome brome beardless rabbitsfoot grass prickly Russian thistle Canadian horseweed tall fescue Arabian schismus Bermudagrass Fixed-site sandbar Randomly selected sandbar Debris fan Channel margin  Graminoid Graminoid Graminoid Forb Forb Graminoid Graminoid Graminoid  0.84 0.72 0.56 0.56 0.53 0.47 0.44 0.37   0                 BACEMO  BACSAL  CYNDAC  PLUSER  SALEXI  TAMAR2             Species     men22-3168_fig 01               men22-3168_fig 01            

 Figure8.Average living foliar cover for the dominant species in Glen Canyon and Marble Canyon (river kilometers -25-97), separated by geomorphic feature class.Species shown consist of the five species with the highest average cover on the randomly selected sites and the five species with the highest average cover on the fixed-site sandbars (note that some species are dominant at both types of sites).Species names abbreviated as follows: BACEMO, Baccharis emoryi; BRODIA, Bromus diandrus; EQUFER, Equisetum x ferrissii; PHRAUS, Phragmites australis; PLUSER, Pluchea sericea; SCHARU, Schedonorus arundinaceus; TAMAR2, Tamarix.Whiskers extend to the most extreme data point that is not more than 1.5 times the interquartile range (IQR).EXPLANATION Figure 9.Average living foliar cover for the dominant species in eastern Grand Canyon (river kilometers 97-259), separated by geomorphic feature class.  Species shown consist of the five species with the highest average cover on the randomly selected sites and the five species with the highest average cover on the fixed-site sandbars (note that some species are dominant at both types of sites).  Species names abbreviated as follows: BACEMO, Baccharis emoryi; BACSAL, Baccharis salicifolia; CYNDAC, Cynodon dactylon; PLUSER, Pluchea sericea; SALEXI, Salix exigua; TAMAR2, Tamarix.  Whiskers extend to the most extreme data point that is not more than 1.5 times the interquartile range (IQR). 

   Western Grand Canyon Outlier 1.5x IQR 75 th percentile 50 th percentile (median) 25 th percentile 1.5x IQR Geomorphic feature class     Fixed-site sandbar   Randomly selected   sandbar   Debris fan   Channel margin  

  Table 7 . 7  Mean living foliar cover (as percentage of quadrat) and standard deviations (in parentheses) by river segment and geomorphic feature.-Continued[Specieslistedareone of the top five highest average foliar cover species in at least one river segment of the study area.River segments are delineated by river kilometers as follows: Glen Canyon and Marble Canyon ("Glen/Marble Canyon"), river kilometers -25 to 97; eastern Grand Canyon ("Eastern GRCA"), river kilometers 97 to 259; western Grand Canyon ("Western GRCA"), river kilometers 259 to 404.]only in the top five cover estimates for randomly selected features in Glen and Marble Canyons (table7).Schedonorus arundinaceus has particularly high cover on debris fans and channel margins in Glen and Marble Canyons (fig.8) and low cover elsewhere.  Bromus diandrus shows little cover variation among geomorphic features in Glen and Marble Canyons (fig. 



  3)    are       1, p. 136-151, https://doi.org/  10.2307/ 2426208.  Capon, S.J., Chambers, L.E., Mac Nally, R., Naiman, R.J., Davies, P., Marshall, N., Pittock, J., Reid, M., Capon, T., Douglas, M., Catford, J., Baldwin, D.S., Stewardson, M., Roberts, J., Parsons, M., and Williams, S.E., 2013, Riparian ecosystems in the 21st century-Hotspots for climate 



  Bendix, J., 1994b, Scale, direction, and pattern in ripar-ian vegetation-environment relationships: Annals of the Association of American Geographers, v. 84, no. 4, p. 652-665, https://doi.org/ 10.1111/ j.1467-8306.1994.tb01881.x.  change adaptation?: Ecosystems, v. 16, no. 3, p. 359-381, https://doi.org/ 10.1007/ s10021-013-9656-1. Carothers, S.W., Aitchison, S.W., Karpiscak, M.M., Rufner, G.A., Sharber, N.J., Shoemaker, P.L., Stevens, L.E., Theroux, M.E., and Tomko, D.S., 1976, An ecological sur-   Blindow, I., Andersson, G., Hargeby, A., and Johansson,  vey of the riparian zone of the Colorado River and its tribu-   S., 1993, Long-term pattern of alternative stable states  taries between Lees Ferry and the Grand Wash Cliffs-Final   in two shallow eutrophic lakes: Freshwater Biology,  research report: U.S. Department of the Interior, National   v. 30, no. 1, p. 159-167, https://doi.org/ 10.1111/ j.1365-  Park Service, Grand Canyon National Park, Colorado   2427.1993.tb00796.x.  River Research Series Contribution no. 38, Technical   Brian, N.J., 1982, A preliminary study of the riparian coyote willow communities along the Colorado River in Grand Canyon National Park, Arizona: Flagstaff, Northern Arizona University, M.S. thesis, 84 p.  Report no. 10, prepared by Museum of Northern Arizona, Flagstaff, Ariz., under contract no. CX821500007, 251 p. [Available at http://www .riversimu lator.org/ Resources/ NPS/ GCresearch/ 1976no10riparian.pdf.] Caster, J.J., and Sankey, J.B., 2016, Variability in rainfall at   Brown, B.T., and Johnson, R.R., 1985, Glen Canyon Dam,  monitoring stations and derivation of a long-term rainfall   fluctuating water levels, and riparian breeding birds-  intensity record in the Grand Canyon Region, Arizona,   The need for management compromise on the Colorado  USA: U.S. Geological Survey Scientific Investigations   River in Grand Canyon, in Riparian ecosystems and their  Report 2016-5012, 38 p., https://doi.org/ 10.3133/   management-Reconciling conflicting uses [Proceedings  sir20165012.   for the First North American Riparian Conference, Tucson, Ariz., April 16-18, 1985]: Fort Collins, Colo., U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, General Technical Report RM-120, 523 p., https://doi.org/ 10.2737/ RM-GTR-120.  Caster, J.J., Sankey, J.B., and Fairley, H., 2018, Meteorological data for selected sites along the Colorado River corridor, Arizona, 2014-2015: U.S. Geological Survey data release, https://doi.org/ 10.5066/ F7DZ0771. Catford, J.A., Naiman, R.J., Chambers, L.E., Roberts, J., Douglas, M., and Davies, P., 2013, Predicting novel riparian   Busch, D.E., and Smith, S.D., 1993, Effects of fire on water  ecosystems in a changing climate: Ecosystems, v. 16, no. 3,   and salinity relations of riparian woody taxa: Oecologia,  p. 382-400, https://doi.org/ 10.1007/ s10021-012-9566-7.   v. 94, no. 2, p. 186-194, https://doi.org/ 10.1007/ BF00341316.  Clover, E.U., and Jotter, L., 1944, Floristic studies in the canyon of the Colorado and tributaries: American Midland   Busch, D.E., and Smith, S.D., 1995, Mechanisms associated with decline of woody species in riparian ecosystems of  Naturalist, v. 32, no. 3, p. 591-642, https://doi.org/ 10.2307/ 2421241.   the southwestern U.S: Ecological Monographs, v. 65, no. 3,  Dean, D.J., and Schmidt, J.C., 2011, The role of feedback   p. 347-370, https://doi.org/ 10.2307/ 2937064.  mechanisms in historic channel changes of the lower Rio   Butterfield, B.J., Grams, P.E., Durning, L.E., Hazel, J.E., Palmquist, E.C., Ralston, B.E., and Sankey, J.B., 2020, Associations between riparian plant morphological guilds and fluvial sediment dynamics along the regulated Colorado River in Grand Canyon: River Research and Applications, v. 36, no. 3, p. 410-421, https://doi.org/ 10.1002/ rra.3589.  Grande in the Big Bend region: Geomorphology, v. 126, no. 3-4, p. 333-349, https://doi.org/ 10.1016/ j. geomorph.2 010.03.009. Dong, X., Grimm, N.B., Ogle, K., and Franklin, J., 2016, Temporal variability in hydrology modifies the influence of geomorphology on wetland distribution along a des-ert stream: Journal of Ecology, v. 104, no. 1, p. 18-30,   Butterfield, B.J., Palmquist, E.C., and Ralston, B.E., 2018,  https://doi.org/ 10.1111/ 1365-2745.12450.   Hydrological regime and climate interactively shape ripar-     ian vegetation composition along the Colorado River,    

 Grand Canyon: Applied Vegetation Science, v. 21, no. 4, https://doi.org/  10.1111/ avsc.12390.  Douhovnikoff, V., McBride, J.R., and Dodd, R.S., 2005, Salix exigua clonal growth and population dynamics in relation to disturbance regime variation: Ecology, v. 86, no. 2, p. 446-452, https://doi.org/  10.1890/ 04-0257. 

   Table 1 . 1 . 11  Family, scientific name, common name, growth form, native status, and number of sites at which each species has been recorded in the study area and within floristic segments. 



     Table 1 . 1 . 11  Family, scientific name, common name, growth form, native status, and number of sites at which each species has been recorded in the study area and within floristic segments.-Continued 



  [River segments are delineated by river kilometers as follows: Glen Canyon, river kilometers -25 to 0; Marble Canyon, river kilometers 0 to 97; eastern Grand Canyon ("Eastern GRCA"), river kilometers 97 to  259; western Grand Canyon ("Western GRCA"), river kilometers 259 to 404.]  

  Table 1 . 1 . 11  Family, scientific name, common name, growth form, native status, and number of sites at which each species has been recorded in the study area and within floristic segments.-Continued 



  [River segments are delineated by river kilometers as follows: Glen Canyon, river kilometers -25 to 0; Marble Canyon, river kilometers 0 to 97; eastern Grand Canyon ("Eastern GRCA"), river kilometers 97 to  259; western Grand Canyon ("Western GRCA"), river kilometers 259 to 404.]  

  Table 1 . 1 . 11  Family, scientific name, common name, growth form, native status, and number of sites at which each species has been recorded in the study area and within floristic segments.-Continued 



  [River segments are delineated by river kilometers as follows: Glen Canyon, river kilometers -25 to 0; Marble Canyon, river kilometers 0 to 97; eastern Grand Canyon ("Eastern GRCA"), river kilometers 97 to  259; western Grand Canyon ("Western GRCA"), river kilometers 259 to 404.]  

  Table 1 . 1 . 11  Family, scientific name, common name, growth form, native status, and number of sites at which each species has been recorded in the study area and within floristic segments.-Continued  [River segments are delineated by river kilometers as follows: Glen Canyon, river kilometers -25 to 0; Marble Canyon, river kilometers 0 to 97; eastern Grand Canyon ("Eastern GRCA"), river kilometers 97 to 259; western Grand Canyon ("Western GRCA"), river kilometers 259 to 404.] 



     Table 1 . 1 . 11  Family, scientific name, common name, growth form, native status, and number of sites at which each species has been recorded in the study area and within floristic segments.-Continued  [River segments are delineated by river kilometers as follows: Glen Canyon, river kilometers -25 to 0; Marble Canyon, river kilometers 0 to 97; eastern Grand Canyon ("Eastern GRCA"), river kilometers 97 to 259; western Grand Canyon ("Western GRCA"), river kilometers 259 to 404.] 



     Table 1 . 1 . 11  Family, scientific name, common name, growth form, native status, and number of sites at which each species has been recorded in the study area and within floristic segments.-Continued  [River segments are delineated by river kilometers as follows: Glen Canyon, river kilometers -25 to 0; Marble Canyon, river kilometers 0 to 97; eastern Grand Canyon ("Eastern GRCA"), river kilometers 97 to 259; western Grand Canyon ("Western GRCA"), river kilometers 259 to 404.] 



     Table 1 . 1 . 11  Family, scientific name, common name, growth form, native status, and number of sites at which each species has been recorded in the study area and within floristic segments.-Continued  [River segments are delineated by river kilometers as follows: Glen Canyon, river kilometers -25 to 0; Marble Canyon, river kilometers 0 to 97; eastern Grand Canyon ("Eastern GRCA"), river kilometers 97 to 259; western Grand Canyon ("Western GRCA"), river kilometers 259 to 404.] 



     ISSN 2331-1258 (online) https://doi.org/  10.3133/ ofr20231026 

  Acknowledgments The data in this report were collected in cooperation with Dustin Perkins, Amy Washuta, and Luke Gommerman from the Northern Colorado Plateau Network Inventory & Monitoring program and with Joseph Hazel and Matthew Kaplinski at Northern Arizona University.  More than 100 volunteers, boat operators, and collaborators assisted with data collection during this study period. 

 Data collection and management were conducted in cooperation with Paul Grams, Thomas Gushue, James Hensleigh, Anna Knight, Sarah Sterner, Andrea Hazelton, Erica Fraley, Laura Durning, and Joel Sankey.  Joshua Caster assisted with climate data and summaries. 





 Appendix 1. Species List for Randomly Selected Sites Table 1 .1 provides a list of all recorded species in the randomly selected sites dataset.  

 Table 1 .1.   Family, scientific name, common name, growth form, native status, and number of sites at which each species has been recorded in the study area and within floristic segments.-Continued 

 [River segments are delineated by river kilometers as follows: Glen Canyon, river kilometers -25 to 0; Marble Canyon, river kilometers 0 to 97; eastern Grand Canyon ("Eastern GRCA"), river kilometers 97 to 259; western Grand Canyon ("Western GRCA"), river kilometers 259 to 404.] 



 Family  Family 

 Diagram illustrating the sampling layout for randomly selected sites     Diagram illustrating the sampling layout for randomly selected sites ..............................   Detrended correspondence analysis scores for all monitoring sites during the study period, grouped by geomorphic feature class, river segment, hydrologic zone, and sampling year data classes  12    Detrended correspondence analysis scores for all monitoring sites during the study period, grouped by geomorphic feature class, river segment, hydrologic zone, and sampling year data classes ....................................................................................12   Average living foliar cover for the dominant species in Glen Canyon and Marble Canyon, separated by geomorphic feature class  17    Average living foliar cover for the dominant species in Glen Canyon and Marble Canyon, separated by geomorphic feature class ...................................................17   Average living foliar cover for the dominant species in eastern Grand Canyon, separated by geomorphic feature class  17    Average living foliar cover for the dominant species in eastern Grand Canyon, separated by geomorphic feature class .................................................................................17   Average living foliar cover for the dominant species in western Grand Canyon, separated by geomorphic feature class  18    Average living foliar cover for the dominant species in western Grand Canyon, separated by geomorphic feature class .................................................................................18   Average total foliar cover for randomly selected sites by river kilometer  20    Average total foliar cover for randomly selected sites by river kilometer ........................20   Fitted-model estimates for total species richness across hydrologic zones  21    Fitted-model estimates for total species richness across hydrologic zones ...................21   Fitted-model estimates for the proportion of native versus nonnative species richness across hydrologic zones  22    Fitted-model estimates for the proportion of native versus nonnative species richness across hydrologic zones ...........................................................................................22   Fitted-model estimates for total vegetation cover across hydrologic zones  22    Fitted-model estimates for total vegetation cover across hydrologic zones ...................22   Fitted-model estimates for the proportion of native versus nonnative species cover across hydrologic zones  23    Fitted-model estimates for the proportion of native versus nonnative species cover across hydrologic zones ................................................................................................23   Fitted-model estimates for Tamarix species cover across hydrologic zones  23    Fitted-model estimates for Tamarix species cover across hydrologic zones ..................23   Fitted-model estimates for Pluchea sericea cover across hydrologic zones  24    Fitted-model estimates for Pluchea sericea cover across hydrologic zones ..................24   Fitted-model estimates for Baccharis species cover across hydrologic zones  D  Bates    M  Mächler    B  Bolker    S  Walker    10.18637/jss.v067.i01     Journal of Statistical Software  67  1    2015    Fitting linear mixed-effects models using Ime4  Fitted-model estimates for Baccharis species cover across hydrologic zones ..............24 References Cited Bates, D., Mächler, M., Bolker, B., and Walker, S., 2015, Fitting linear mixed-effects models using Ime4: Journal of Statistical Software, v. 67, no. 1, p. 1-48, https://doi.org/ 10.18637/ jss.v067.i01.   A synoptic review of Tamarix biocontrol in North America-Tracking success in the midst of controversy  D  Bean    T  Dudley    10.1007/s10526-018-9880-x     BioControl  63  3    2018    Bean, D., and Dudley, T., 2018, A synoptic review of Tamarix biocontrol in North America-Tracking success in the midst of controversy: BioControl, v. 63, no. 3, p. 361-376, https://doi.org/ 10.1007/ s10526-018-9880-x.   Changes to herbaceous plant communities on a regulated desert river  V  B  Beauchamp    J  C  Stromberg    10.1002/rra.1078     River Research and Applications  24  6    2008    Beauchamp, V.B., and Stromberg, J.C., 2008, Changes to herbaceous plant communities on a regulated desert river: River Research and Applications, v. 24, no. 6, p. 754-770, https://doi.org/ 10.1002/ rra.1078.   Remote sensing of tamarisk beetle (Diorhabda carinulata) impacts along 412 km of the Colorado River in the Grand Canyon, Arizona  A  Bedford    T  T  Sankey    J  B  Sankey    L  E  Durning    B  E  Ralston    10.1016/j.ecolind.2018.02.026     USA: Ecological Indicators  89    2018    Bedford, A., Sankey, T.T., Sankey, J.B., Durning, L.E., and Ralston, B.E., 2018, Remote sensing of tamarisk beetle (Diorhabda carinulata) impacts along 412 km of the Colorado River in the Grand Canyon, Arizona, USA: Ecological Indicators, v. 89, p. 365-375, https://doi.org/ 10.1016/ j .ecolind.2 018.02.026.   Responses of riparian guilds to flow alterations in a Mediterranean stream  M  D  Bejarano    M  González Del Tánago    D  G  De Jalón    M  Marchamalo    Á  Sordo-Ward    J  Solana-Gutiérrez    10.1111/j.1654-1103.2011.01360.x     Journal of Vegetation Science  23  3    2012    Bejarano, M.D., González del Tánago, M., de Jalón, D.G., Marchamalo, M., Sordo-Ward, Á., and Solana-Gutiérrez, J., 2012, Responses of riparian guilds to flow alterations in a Mediterranean stream: Journal of Vegetation Science, v. 23, no. 3, p. 443-458, https://doi.org/ 10.1111/ j.1654-1103.2011.01360.x.   Riparian plant guilds become simpler and most likely fewer following flow regulation  M  D  Bejarano    C  Nilsson    F  C  Aguiar    10.1111/1365-2664.12949     Journal of Applied Ecology  55  1    2018    Bejarano, M.D., Nilsson, C., and Aguiar, F.C., 2018, Riparian plant guilds become simpler and most likely fewer fol- lowing flow regulation: Journal of Applied Ecology, v. 55, no. 1, p. 365-376, https://doi.org/ 10.1111/ 1365-2664.12949.   Four-band image mosaic of the Colorado River corridor downstream of Glen Canyon Dam in Arizona, derived from the May 2013 airborne image acquisition  L  E  Durning    J  B  Sankey    P  A  Davis    T  T  Sankey    10.3133/ds1027     U.S. Geological Survey Data Series  1027  2016    Durning, L.E., Sankey, J.B., Davis, P.A., and Sankey, T.T., 2016, Four-band image mosaic of the Colorado River corridor downstream of Glen Canyon Dam in Arizona, derived from the May 2013 airborne image acquisition: U.S. Geological Survey Data Series 1027, https://doi.org/ 10.3133/ ds1027.   Hydrologic and geomorphic effects on riparian plant species occurrence and encroachment-Remote sensing of 360 km of the Colorado River in Grand Canyon: Ecohydrology  L  E  Durning    J  B  Sankey    C  B  Yackulic    P  E  Grams    B  J  Butterfield    T  T  Sankey    10.1002/eco.2344    2021  14    Durning, L.E., Sankey, J.B., Yackulic, C.B., Grams, P.E., Butterfield, B.J., and Sankey, T.T., 2021, Hydrologic and geomorphic effects on riparian plant species occurrence and encroachment-Remote sensing of 360 km of the Colorado River in Grand Canyon: Ecohydrology, v. 14, no. 8, https://doi.org/ 10.1002/ eco.2344.   Modern landscape processes affecting archaeological sites along the Colorado River corridor downstream of Glen Canyon Dam, Glen Canyon National Recreation Area  A  E  East    J  B  Sankey    H  C  Fairley    J  J  Caster    A  Kasprak    10.3133/sir20175082  2017-5082    2017  U.S. Geological Survey Scientific  22  , Arizona    Investigations Report  East, A.E., Sankey, J.B., Fairley, H.C., Caster, J.J., and Kasprak, A., 2017, Modern landscape processes affect- ing archaeological sites along the Colorado River corridor downstream of Glen Canyon Dam, Glen Canyon National Recreation Area, Arizona: U.S. Geological Survey Scientific Investigations Report 2017-5082, 22 p., https://doi.org/ 10.3133/ sir20175082.   Cultural resources in the Colorado River corridor  H  C  Fairley    10.3133/cir1282  Circular 1282     The state of the Colorado River ecosystem in Grand Canyon-A report of the Grand Canyon Monitoring and Research Center 1991-2004  S  P  Gloss    J  E  Lovich    T  S  Melis    U.S. Geological Survey  2005      Fairley, H.C., 2005, Cultural resources in the Colorado River corridor, in Gloss, S.P., Lovich, J.E., and Melis, T.S., eds., The state of the Colorado River ecosystem in Grand Canyon-A report of the Grand Canyon Monitoring and Research Center 1991-2004: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1282, p. 177-192., https://doi.org/ 10.3133/ cir1282.   Hybrid Tamarix widespread in the U.S. invasion and undetected in native Asian range  J  F  Gaskin    B  A  Schaal    10.1073/pnas.132403299     Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  99  17    2002    Gaskin, J.F., and Schaal, B.A., 2002, Hybrid Tamarix wide- spread in the U.S. invasion and undetected in native Asian range: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, v. 99, no. 17, p. 11256-11259, https://doi.org/ 10.1073/ pnas.132403299.   The state of the Colorado River ecosystem in Grand Canyon-A report of the Grand Canyon Monitoring and Research Center 1991-2004  S  Gloss    J  E  Lovich    T  S  Melis    10.3133/cir1282     U.S. Geological Survey Circular  1282  220  2005    Gloss, S., Lovich, J.E., and Melis, T.S., eds., 2005, The state of the Colorado River ecosystem in Grand Canyon-A report of the Grand Canyon Monitoring and Research Center 1991-2004: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1282, 220 p., https://doi.org/ 10.3133/ cir1282.   Regeneration of Salicaceae riparian forests in the Northern Hemisphere-A new framework and management tool  E  González    V  Martínez-Fernández    P  B  Shafroth    A  A  Sher    A  L  Henry    V  Garófano-Gómez    D  Corenblit    10.1016/j.jenvman.2018.04.069     Journal of Environmental Management  218    2018    González, E., Martínez-Fernández, V., Shafroth, P.B., Sher, A.A., Henry, A.L., Garófano-Gómez, V., and Corenblit, D., 2018, Regeneration of Salicaceae riparian forests in the Northern Hemisphere-A new framework and manage- ment tool: Journal of Environmental Management, v. 218, p. 374-387, https://doi.org/ 10.1016/ j .jenvman.2 018.04.069.   Combined effects of biological control of an invasive shrub and fluvial processes on riparian vegetation dynamics  E  González    P  B  Shafroth    S  R  Lee    S  M  Ostoja    M  L  Brooks    10.1007/s10530-020-02259-9     Biological Invasions  22  7    2020    González, E., Shafroth, P.B., Lee, S.R., Ostoja, S.M., and Brooks, M.L., 2020, Combined effects of biological control of an invasive shrub and fluvial processes on riparian vegetation dynamics: Biological Invasions, v. 22, no. 7, p. 2339-2356, https://doi.org/ 10.1007/ s10530-020-02259-9.   An ecosystem perspective of riparian zones  S  V  Gregory    F  J  Swanson    W  A  Mckee    K  W  Cummins    10.2307/1311607     Bioscience  41  8    1991    Gregory, S.V., Swanson, F.J., McKee, W.A., and Cummins, K.W., 1991, An ecosystem perspective of riparian zones: Bioscience, v. 41, no. 8, p. 540-551, https://doi.org/ 10.2307/ 1311607.   Frequency and initiation of debris flows in Grand Canyon  P  G  Griffiths    R  H  Webb    T  S  Melis    10.1029/2003JF000077     Arizona: Journal of Geophysical Research  109  4  14  2004    article F04002  Griffiths, P.G., Webb, R.H., and Melis, T.S., 2004, Frequency and initiation of debris flows in Grand Canyon, Arizona: Journal of Geophysical Research, v. 109, no. F4, article F04002, 14 p., https://doi.org/ 10.1029/ 2003JF000077.   Colorado River mile system  T  M  Gushue    10.5066/P9IRL3GV    2019  U.S. Geological  Grand Canyon, Arizona    Survey data release  Gushue, T.M., 2019, Colorado River mile system, Grand Canyon, Arizona: U.S. Geological Survey data release, https://doi.org/ 10.5066/ P9IRL3GV.   Quantifying geomorphic and vegetation change at sandbar campsites in response to flow regulation and controlled floods  D  R  Hadley    P  E  Grams    M  A  Kaplinski    10.1002/rra.3349     Grand Canyon National Park, Arizona: River Research and Applications  34  9    2018    Hadley, D.R., Grams, P.E., and Kaplinski, M.A., 2018, Quantifying geomorphic and vegetation change at sandbar campsites in response to flow regulation and controlled floods, Grand Canyon National Park, Arizona: River Research and Applications, v. 34, no. 9, p. 1208-1218, https://doi.org/ 10.1002/ rra.3349.   Influence of a dam on fine-sediment storage in a canyon river  J  E  Hazel    Jr    D  J  Topping    J  C  Schmidt    M  Kaplinski    10.1029/2004JF000193     Journal of Geophysical Research  111  1  16  2006    article F01025  Hazel, J.E., Jr., Topping, D.J., Schmidt, J.C., and Kaplinski, M., 2006, Influence of a dam on fine-sediment storage in a canyon river: Journal of Geophysical Research, v. 111, no. F1, article F01025, 16 p., https://doi.org/ 10.1029/ 2004JF000193.   Novel ecosystems-Theoretical and management aspects of the new ecological world order  R  J  Hobbs    S  Arico    J  Aronson    J  S  Baron    P  Bridgewater    V  A  Cramer    P  R  Epstein    J  J  Ewel    C  A  Klink    A  E  Lugo    D  Norton    D  Ojima    D  M  Richardson    E  W  Sanderson    F  Valladares    M  Vilà    R  Zamora    M  Zobel    10.1111/j.1466-822X.2006.00212.x     Global Ecology and Biogeography  15  1    2006    Hobbs, R.J., Arico, S., Aronson, J., Baron, J.S., Bridgewater, P., Cramer, V.A., Epstein, P.R., Ewel, J.J., Klink, C.A., Lugo, A.E., Norton, D., Ojima, D., Richardson, D.M., Sanderson, E.W., Valladares, F., Vilà, M., Zamora, R., and Zobel, M., 2006, Novel ecosystems-Theoretical and management aspects of the new ecological world order: Global Ecology and Biogeography, v. 15, no. 1, p. 1-7, https://doi.org/ 10.1111/ j.1466-822X.2006.00212.x.   Birds of the Colorado River in Grand Canyon-A synthesis of status, trends and dam operations effects  J  A  Holmes    J  R  Spence    M  K  Sogge    10.3133/cir1282  Circular 1282     The state of the Colorado River ecosystem in Grand Canyon-A report of the Grand Canyon Monitoring and Research Center 1991-2004  S  P  Gloss    J  E  Lovich    T  S  Melis    U.S. Geological Survey  2005      Holmes, J.A., Spence, J.R., and Sogge, M.K., 2005, Birds of the Colorado River in Grand Canyon-A synthesis of status, trends and dam operations effects, in Gloss, S.P., Lovich, J.E., and Melis, T.S., eds., The state of the Colorado River ecosystem in Grand Canyon-A report of the Grand Canyon Monitoring and Research Center 1991-2004: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1282, p. 123-138., https://doi.org/ 10.3133/ cir1282.   Traditional Hualapai ecological monitoring knowledge monitoring protocols-Adaptive Management Program Technical Working Group meeting  L  Jackson-Kelly    D  Hubbs       Hualapai Tribe, Department of Cultural Resources  27  2007. April 2-3, 2007  Phoenix, Ariz.    slide presentation. Available at h ttps  Jackson-Kelly, L., and Hubbs, D., 2007, Traditional Hualapai ecological monitoring knowledge monitoring protocols- Adaptive Management Program Technical Working Group meeting: Phoenix, Ariz., April 2-3, 2007, Hualapai Tribe, Department of Cultural Resources, 27-slide presentation. [Available at h ttps://www .usbr.gov/ uc/ progact/ amp/ twg/ 2007-04-02-twg-meeting/ Attach_ 13c.pdf.]   Effects of river regulation on river-margin vegetation-A comparison of eight boreal rivers  R  Jansson    C  Nilsson    M  Dynesius    E  Andersson    10.1890/1051-0761(2000)010[0203:EORROR]2.0.CO;2     Ecological Applications  10  1    2000    Jansson, R., Nilsson, C., Dynesius, M., and Andersson, E., 2000, Effects of river regulation on river-margin vegetation-A comparison of eight boreal rivers: Ecological Applications, v. 10, no. 1, p. 203-224, https://doi.org/ 10.1890/ 1051-076 1(2000)010 [0203:EORR OR]2.0.CO; 2   Recreational values and campsites in the Colorado River ecosystem  M  Kaplinski    J  Behan    J  E  Hazel    R  A  Parnell    H  C  Fairley    10.3133/cir1282  Circular 1282     The state of the Colorado River ecosystem in Grand Canyon-A report of the Grand Canyon Monitoring and Research Center 1991-2004  S  P  Gloss    J  E  Lovich    T  S  Melis    U.S. Geological Survey  2005      Kaplinski, M., Behan, J., Hazel, J.E., Parnell, R.A., and Fairley, H.C., 2005, Recreational values and campsites in the Colorado River ecosystem, in Gloss, S.P., Lovich, J.E., and Melis, T.S., eds., The state of the Colorado River ecosystem in Grand Canyon-A report of the Grand Canyon Monitoring and Research Center 1991-2004: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1282, p. 193-205., https://doi.org/ 10.3133/ cir1282.   M  A  Kaplinski    J  E  Hazel    R  Parnell    D  R  Hadley    P  E  Grams    10.3133/ofr20141161  Open-File Report 2014-1161, 24    Colorado River campsite monitoring  Grand Canyon National Park, Arizona    U.S. Geological Survey  2014. 1998-2012    Kaplinski, M.A., Hazel, J.E., Parnell, R., Hadley, D.R., and Grams, P.E., 2014, Colorado River campsite monitoring, 1998-2012, Grand Canyon National Park, Arizona: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 2014-1161, 24 p., https://doi.org/ 10.3133/ ofr20141161.   Quantifying and forecasting changes in the areal extent of river valley sediment in response to altered hydrology and land cover  A  Kasprak    J  B  Sankey    D  Buscombe    J  Caster    A  E  East    P  E  Grams    10.1177/0309133318795846     Progress in Physical Geography  42  6    2018    Kasprak, A., Sankey, J.B., Buscombe, D., Caster, J., East, A.E., and Grams, P.E., 2018, Quantifying and forecast- ing changes in the areal extent of river valley sedi- ment in response to altered hydrology and land cover: Progress in Physical Geography, v. 42, no. 6, p. 739-764, https://doi.org/ 10.1177/ 0309133318795846.   Discharge records and sand extents along the Colorado River between Glen Canyon Dam and Phantom Ranch  A  Kasprak    J  B  Sankey    B  J  Butterfield    10.5066/P918E2P3     U.S. Geological Survey data release  2021  Arizona    Kasprak, A., Sankey, J.B., and Butterfield, B.J., 2021, Discharge records and sand extents along the Colorado River between Glen Canyon Dam and Phantom Ranch, Arizona: U.S. Geological Survey data release, https://doi.org/ 10.5066/ P918E2P3.   Effects of Glen Canyon Dam on Colorado River sand deposits used as campsites in Grand Canyon National Park  L  H  Kearsley    J  C  Schmidt    K  D  Warren    10.1002/rrr.3450090302     USA: Regulated Rivers  9  3    1994    Kearsley, L.H., Schmidt, J.C., and Warren, K.D., 1994, Effects of Glen Canyon Dam on Colorado River sand deposits used as campsites in Grand Canyon National Park, USA: Regulated Rivers, v. 9, no. 3, p. 137-149, https://doi.org/ 10.1002/ rrr.3450090302.   The effects of interim flows from Glen Canyon Dam on riparian vegetation in the Colorado River corridor, Grand Canyon National Park, Arizona-Final report  M  J C  Kearsley    T  J  Ayers      1996  Northern Arizona University  702  Flagstaff, Ariz.   Grand Canyon National Park, Grand Canyon Science Center    under cooperative agreement work order no. 8041-8-0002  Kearsley, M.J.C., and Ayers, T.J., 1996, The effects of interim flows from Glen Canyon Dam on riparian vegetation in the Colorado River corridor, Grand Canyon National Park, Arizona-Final report: Grand Canyon, Ariz., Grand Canyon National Park, Grand Canyon Science Center, prepared by Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, Ariz., under cooperative agreement work order no. 8041-8-0002, 702 p. [Available at http://www .riversimu lator.org/ Resources/ GCMRC/ Terrestrial/ Kearsley1996b.pdf.]   Inventory and monitoring of terrestrial riparian resources in the Colorado River corridor of Grand Canyon-An integrative approach  M  J C  Kearsley    N  Cobb    H  Yard    D  Lightfoot    S  Brantley    G  Carpenter    J  Frey     Grand Canyon Monitoring and Research Center  Flagstaff, Ariz., U.S    HYC  2004  218    Draft final report. prepared by authors under cooperative agreement and assistance awards nos. 01-WRAG-0044 (NAU) and 01-WRAG-0034  Kearsley, M.J.C., Cobb, N., Yard, H., Lightfoot, D., Brantley, S., Carpenter, G., and Frey, J., 2004, Inventory and monitor- ing of terrestrial riparian resources in the Colorado River corridor of Grand Canyon-An integrative approach [Draft final report]: Flagstaff, Ariz., U.S. Geological Survey, Grand Canyon Monitoring and Research Center, prepared by authors under cooperative agreement and assistance awards nos. 01-WRAG-0044 (NAU) and 01-WRAG-0034 (HYC), 218 p.   Emmeans: Estimated marginal means, aka leastsquares means: R package version  R  Lenth    H  Singmann    J  Love    P  Buerkner    M  Herve    2018  1    Lenth, R., Singmann, H., Love, J., Buerkner, P., and Herve, M., 2018, Emmeans: Estimated marginal means, aka least- squares means: R package version, v. 1, no. 1, p.   Riparian plant species richness along lateral and longitudinal gradients of water stress and flood disturbance  S  J  Lite    K  J  Bagstad    J  C  Stromberg    10.1016/j.jaridenv.2005.03.026     Journal of Arid Environments  63  4    2005  San Pedro River, Arizona, USA    Lite, S.J., Bagstad, K.J., and Stromberg, J.C., 2005, Riparian plant species richness along lateral and longitudinal gradi- ents of water stress and flood disturbance, San Pedro River, Arizona, USA: Journal of Arid Environments, v. 63, no. 4, p. 785-813, https://doi.org/ 10.1016/ j. jaridenv.2 005.03.026.   Adaptation to natural flow regimes  D  A  Lytle    N  L  Poff    10.1016/j.tree.2003.10.002     Trends in Ecology & Evolution  19  2    2004    Lytle, D.A., and Poff, N.L., 2004, Adaptation to natural flow regimes: Trends in Ecology & Evolution, v. 19, no. 2, p. 94-100, https://doi.org/ 10.1016/ j.tree.2003.10.002.   Changes in hydrologic regime by dams: Geomorphology  F  J  Magilligan    K  H  Nislow    10.1016/j.geomorph.2004.08.017    2005  71      Magilligan, F.J., and Nislow, K.H., 2005, Changes in hydro- logic regime by dams: Geomorphology, v. 71, no. 1-2, p. 61-78, https://doi.org/ 10.1016/ j. geomorph.2 004.08.017.   Nanise'-A Navajo herbal-One hundred plants from the Navajo Reservation  V  O  Mayes    B  B  Lacy    1989  Navajo Community College Press  153    Mayes, V.O., and Lacy, B.B., 1989, Nanise'-A Navajo herbal-One hundred plants from the Navajo Reservation: Tsaile, Ariz., Navajo Community College Press, 153 p.   Changes in community-level riparian plant traits over inundation gradients  M  E  Mccoy-Sulentic    T  E  Kolb    D  M  Merritt    E  Palmquist    B  E  Ralston    D  A  Sarr    P  B  Shafroth    10.1007/s13157-017-0895-3     Colorado River, Grand Canyon: Wetlands  37  4    2017    McCoy-Sulentic, M.E., Kolb, T.E., Merritt, D.M., Palmquist, E., Ralston, B.E., Sarr, D.A., and Shafroth, P.B., 2017a, Changes in community-level riparian plant traits over inun- dation gradients, Colorado River, Grand Canyon: Wetlands, v. 37, no. 4, p. 635-646, https://doi.org/ 10.1007/ s13157- 017-0895-3.   Variation in species-level plant functional traits over wetland indicator status categories  M  E  Mccoy-Sulentic    T  E  Kolb    D  M  Merritt    E  C  Palmquist    B  E  Ralston    D  A  Sarr    10.1002/ece3.2975     Ecology and Evolution  7  11    2017    McCoy-Sulentic, M.E., Kolb, T.E., Merritt, D.M., Palmquist, E.C., Ralston, B.E., and Sarr, D.A., 2017b, Variation in species-level plant functional traits over wetland indica- tor status categories: Ecology and Evolution, v. 7, no. 11, p. 3732-3744, https://doi.org/ 10.1002/ ece3.2975.   Distribution of invasive and native riparian woody plants across the western USA in relation to climate, river flow, floodplain geometry and patterns of introduction  R  Mcshane    D  Auerbach    J  M  Friedman    G  T  Auble    P  B  Shafroth    M  F  Merigliano    J  M  Scott    N  L  Poff    10.1111/ecog.01285     Ecography  38  12    2015    McShane, R., Auerbach, D., Friedman, J.M., Auble, G.T., Shafroth, P.B., Merigliano, M.F., Scott, J.M., and Poff, N.L., 2015, Distribution of invasive and native riparian woody plants across the western USA in relation to climate, river flow, floodplain geometry and patterns of introduction: Ecography, v. 38, no. 12, p. 1254-1265, https://doi.org/ 10.1111/ ecog.01285.   The National Riparian Core Protocol-A riparian vegetation monitoring protocol for wadeable streams of the conterminous United States: Fort Collins  10.2737/RMRS-GTR-367  RMRS- GTR-367    Merritt, D.M., Manning, M.E., and Hough-Snee, N.  2017  35  Colo.   U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, National Riparian Technical Team, General    Technical Report  Merritt, D.M., Manning, M.E., and Hough-Snee, N., eds., 2017, The National Riparian Core Protocol-A ripar- ian vegetation monitoring protocol for wadeable streams of the conterminous United States: Fort Collins, Colo., U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, National Riparian Technical Team, General Technical Report RMRS- GTR-367, 35 p., https://doi.org/ 10.2737/ RMRS-GTR-367.   Shifting dominance of riparian Populus and Tamarix along gradients of flow alteration in western North American Rivers  D  M  Merritt    N  L  Poff    10.1890/08-2251.1     Ecological Applications  20  1    2010    Merritt, D.M., and Poff, N.L., 2010, Shifting dominance of riparian Populus and Tamarix along gradients of flow alteration in western North American Rivers: Ecological Applications, v. 20, no. 1, p. 135-152, https://doi.org/ 10.1890/ 08-2251.   Does river regulation increase the dominance of invasive woody species in riparian landscapes?  S  G  Mortenson    P  J  Weisberg    10.1111/j.1466-8238.2010.00533.x     Global Ecology and Biogeography  19  4    2010    Mortenson, S.G., and Weisberg, P.J., 2010, Does river regula- tion increase the dominance of invasive woody species in riparian landscapes?: Global Ecology and Biogeography, v. 19, no. 4, p. 562-574, https://doi.org/ 10.1111/ j.1466- 8238.2010.00533.x.   Variability in eddy sandbar dynamics during two decades of controlled flooding of the Colorado River in the Grand Canyon  E  R  Mueller    P  E  Grams    J  E  Hazel    Jr    J  C  Schmidt    10.1016/j.sedgeo.2017.11.007     Sedimentary Geology  363    2018    Mueller, E.R., Grams, P.E., Hazel, J.E., Jr., and Schmidt, J.C., 2018, Variability in eddy sandbar dynamics during two decades of controlled flooding of the Colorado River in the Grand Canyon: Sedimentary Geology, v. 363, p. 181-199, https://doi.org/ 10.1016/ j.sedgeo.2017.11.007.   The influence of controlled floods on fine sediment storage in debris fan-affected canyons of the Colorado River Basin  E  R  Mueller    P  E  Grams    J  C  Schmidt    J  E  Hazel    Jr    J  S  Alexander    M  Kaplinski    10.1016/j.geomorph.2014.07.029     Geomorphology  226    2014    Mueller, E.R., Grams, P.E., Schmidt, J.C., Hazel, J.E., Jr., Alexander, J.S., and Kaplinski, M., 2014, The influ- ence of controlled floods on fine sediment storage in debris fan-affected canyons of the Colorado River Basin: Geomorphology, v. 226, p. 65-75, https://doi.org/ 10.1016/ j. geomorph.2 014.07.029.   The ecology of interfaces-Riparian zones  R  J  Naiman    H  Decamps    10.1146/annurev.ecolsys.28.1.621     Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics  28  1    1997    Naiman, R.J., and Decamps, H., 1997, The ecology of interfaces-Riparian zones: Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics, v. 28, no. 1, p. 621-658, https://doi.org/ 10.1146/ annu rev.ecolsy s.28.1.621.     Colorado River management plan  Grand Canyon National Park    U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service  2006  35    National Park Service, 2006, Colorado River management plan: U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service, Grand Canyon National Park, 35 p. [Available at https://www.nps.gov/ grca/ learn/ management/ upload/ CRMPIF_ s.pdf.]   J  Oksanen    F  G  Blanchet    M  Friendly    R  Kindt    P  Legendre    D  Mcglinn    P  R  Minchin    R  B  O'hara    G  L  Simpson    P  Solymos    M  H H S  Stevens    E  Szoecs    H  Wagner      vegan-Community ecology package, version 2.3-2: R Foundation for Statistical Computing software release  2015    Additional information is  Oksanen, J., Blanchet, F.G., Friendly, M., Kindt, R., Legendre, P., McGlinn, D., Minchin, P.R., O'Hara, R.B., Simpson, G.L., Solymos, P., Stevens, M.H.H.S., Szoecs, E., and Wagner, H., 2015, vegan-Community ecology package, version 2.3-2: R Foundation for Statistical Computing software release. [Additional information is available at https://CRAN.R-project.org/ package= vegan.]   Riparian vegetation data downstream of Glen Canyon Dam in Glen Canyon National Recreation Area and Grand Canyon National  E  C  Palmquist    B  J  Butterfield    B  E  Ralston    10.5066/P9KEHY2S    2022. 2014 to 2019  U.S. Geological  Park, AZ from    Survey data release  Palmquist, E.C., Butterfield, B.J., and Ralston, B.E., 2022, Riparian vegetation data downstream of Glen Canyon Dam in Glen Canyon National Recreation Area and Grand Canyon National Park, AZ from 2014 to 2019: U.S. Geological Survey data release, https://doi.org/ 10.5066/ P9KEHY2S.   Landscape-scale processes influence riparian plant composition along a regulated river  E  C  Palmquist    B  E  Ralston    D  M  Merritt    P  B  Shafroth    10.1016/j.jaridenv.2017.10.001     Journal of Arid Environments  148    2018    a  Palmquist, E.C., Ralston, B.E., Merritt, D.M., and Shafroth, P.B., 2018a, Landscape-scale processes influence riparian plant composition along a regulated river: Journal of Arid Environments, v. 148, p. 54-64, https://doi.org/ 10.1016/ j. jaridenv.2 017.10.001.   Monitoring riparian-vegetation composition and cover along the Colorado River downstream of Glen Canyon Dam, Arizona  E  C  Palmquist    B  E  Ralston    D  A  Sarr    T  C  Johnson    10.3133/tm2A14     U.S. Geological Survey Techniques and Methods  2  65  2018    Palmquist, E.C., Ralston, B.E., Sarr, D.A., and Johnson, T.C., 2018b, Monitoring riparian-vegetation composition and cover along the Colorado River downstream of Glen Canyon Dam, Arizona: U.S. Geological Survey Techniques and Methods, book 2, chap. A14, 65 p., https://doi.org/ 10.3133/ tm2A14.   Functional traits and ecological affinities of riparian plants along the Colorado River in Grand Canyon  E  Palmquist    B  E  Ralston    D  A  Sarr    D  M  Merritt    P  B  Shafroth    J  A  Scott    10.3398/064.077.0104     Western North American Naturalist  77  1    2017    Palmquist, E., Ralston, B.E., Sarr, D.A., Merritt, D.M., Shafroth, P.B., and Scott, J.A., 2017, Functional traits and ecological affinities of riparian plants along the Colorado River in Grand Canyon: Western North American Naturalist, v. 77, no. 1, p. 22-30, https://doi.org/ 10.3398/ 064.077.0104.   A comparison of riparian vegetation sampling methods along a large, regulated river  E  C  Palmquist    S  A  Sterner    B  E  Ralston    10.1002/rra.3440     River Research and Applications  35  6    2019    Palmquist, E.C., Sterner, S.A., and Ralston, B.E., 2019, A comparison of riparian vegetation sampling methods along a large, regulated river: River Research and Applications, v. 35, no. 6, p. 759-767, https://doi.org/ 10.1002/ rra.3440.   D  W  Perkins    M  Scott    G  Auble    M  Wondzell    C  Holmquist-Johnson    E  Wahlig    H  Thomas    A  Wight    NPS/NCPN/NRR-2018/1707    Big rivers monitoring protocol for park units in the Northern Colorado Plateau Network-Version 1.01  Fort Collins, Colo  2018  46   Department of the Interior, National Park Service, Natural Resource    Report  Perkins, D.W., Scott, M., Auble, G., Wondzell, M., Holmquist- Johnson, C., Wahlig, E., Thomas, H., and Wight, A., 2018, Big rivers monitoring protocol for park units in the Northern Colorado Plateau Network-Version 1.01: Fort Collins, Colo., Department of the Interior, National Park Service, Natural Resource Report NPS/NCPN/NRR-2018/1707, 46 p. [Available at h ttps://irm a.nps.gov/ DataStore/ Reference/ Profile/ 2254720.]   Incorporating climate change projections into riparian restoration planning and design  L  G  Perry    L  V  Reynolds    T  J  Beechie    M  J  Collins    P  B  Shafroth    10.1002/eco.1645     Ecohydrology  8  5    2015    Perry, L.G., Reynolds, L.V., Beechie, T.J., Collins, M.J., and Shafroth, P.B., 2015, Incorporating climate change projections into riparian restoration planning and design: Ecohydrology, v. 8, no. 5, p. 863-879, https://doi.org/ 10.1002/ eco.1645.   The natural flow regime-A paradigm for river conservation and restoration  N  L  Poff    J  D  Allan    M  B  Bain    J  R  Karr    K  L  Prestegaard    B  D  Richter    R  E  Sparks    J  C  Stromberg    10.2307/1313099     Bioscience  47  11    1997    Poff, N.L., Allan, J.D., Bain, M.B., Karr, J.R., Prestegaard, K.L., Richter, B.D., Sparks, R.E., and Stromberg, J.C., 1997, The natural flow regime-A paradigm for river conservation and restoration: Bioscience, v. 47, no. 11, p. 769-784, https://doi.org/ 10.2307/ 1313099.   The response of salt cedar, Tamarix chinensis, to experimental flows in Grand Canyon: Hydrology and Water Resources in Arizona and the Southwest  M  E  Porter    M  J C  Kearsley      2001  31      Porter, M.E., and Kearsley, M.J.C., 2001, The response of salt cedar, Tamarix chinensis, to experimental flows in Grand Canyon: Hydrology and Water Resources in Arizona and the Southwest, v. 31, p. 45-50, https://doi.org/ 10150/ 296583.   Team  Core      R-A language and environment for statistical computing, version 4.1.2 (Bird Hippie): R Foundation for Statistical Computing software release  2021    R Core Team, 2021, R-A language and environment for statistical computing, version 4.1.2 (Bird Hippie): R Foundation for Statistical Computing software release. [Additional information is available at https://www.r- project.org/ .]   Riparian vegetation response to the March 2008 short-duration, high-flow experiment-Implications of timing and frequency of flood disturbance on nonnative plant establishment along the Colorado River below Glen Canyon Dam  B  E  Ralston    10.3133/ofr20101022  2010-1022     U.S. Geological  30  2010    Survey Open-File Report  Ralston, B.E., 2010, Riparian vegetation response to the March 2008 short-duration, high-flow experiment- Implications of timing and frequency of flood disturbance on nonnative plant establishment along the Colorado River below Glen Canyon Dam: U.S. Geological Survey Open- File Report 2010-1022, 30 p., https://doi.org/ 10.3133/ ofr20101022.   Summary report of responses of key resources to the 2000 low steady summer flow experiment, along the Colorado River downstream from Glen Canyon Dam  B  E  Ralston    10.3133/ofr20111220  Open-File Report 2011-1220    2011  U.S. Geological Survey  129  , Arizona    Ralston, B.E., 2011, Summary report of responses of key resources to the 2000 low steady summer flow experiment, along the Colorado River downstream from Glen Canyon Dam, Arizona: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 2011-1220, 129 p., https://doi.org/ 10.3133/ ofr20111220.   Case studies of riparian and watershed restoration in the southwestern United States-Principles, challenges, and successes  B  E  Ralston    D  A  Sarr    10.3133/ofr20171091  2017-1091     U.S. Geological  116  2017    Survey Open-File Report  Ralston, B.E., and Sarr, D.A., 2017, Case studies of ripar- ian and watershed restoration in the southwestern United States-Principles, challenges, and successes: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 2017-1091, 116 p., https://doi.org/ 10.3133/ ofr20171091.   Modeled intermittency risk for small streams in the Upper Colorado River Basin under climate change  L  V  Reynolds    P  B  Shafroth    N  L  Poff    10.1016/j.jhydrol.2015.02.025     Journal of Hydrology  523    2015    Reynolds, L.V., Shafroth, P.B., and Poff, N.L., 2015, Modeled intermittency risk for small streams in the Upper Colorado River Basin under climate change: Journal of Hydrology, v. 523, p. 768-780, https://doi.org/ 10.1016/ j .jhydrol.2 015.02.025.   Managing river flows to restore floodplain forests  S  B  Rood    G  M  Samuelson    J  H  Braatne    C  R  Gourley    F  M R  Hughes    J  M  Mahoney    10.1890/1540-9295(2005)003[0193:MRFTRF]2.0.CO;2     Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment  3  4    2005    Rood, S.B., Samuelson, G.M., Braatne, J.H., Gourley, C.R., Hughes, F.M.R., and Mahoney, J.M., 2005, Managing river flows to restore floodplain forests: Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, v. 3, no. 4, p. 193-201, https://doi.org/ 10.1890/ 1540-929 5(2005)003 [0193:MRFT RF]2.0.CO;   Origin, structure, and evolution of a reattachment bar  D  M  Rubin    J  C  Schmidt    J  N  Moore    10.1306/D426765E-2B26-11D7-8648000102C1865D     Journal of Sedimentary Research  60  6    1990  Colorado River, Grand Canyon, Arizona    Rubin, D.M., Schmidt, J.C., and Moore, J.N., 1990, Origin, structure, and evolution of a reattachment bar, Colorado River, Grand Canyon, Arizona: Journal of Sedimentary Research, v. 60, no. 6, p. 982-991, https://doi.org/ 10.1306/ D426765E-2B26-11D7-8648000102C1865D.   Recent sediment studies refute Glen Canyon Dam hypothesis  D  M  Rubin    D  J  Topping    J  C  Schmidt    J  Hazel    M  Kaplinski    T  S  Melis    10.1029/2002EO000191     Eos  83  25    2002    Rubin, D.M., Topping, D.J., Schmidt, J.C., Hazel, J., Kaplinski, M., and Melis, T.S., 2002, Recent sediment stud- ies refute Glen Canyon Dam hypothesis: Eos, v. 83, no. 25, p. 273, 277-278, https://doi.org/ 10.1029/ 2002EO000191.   Gully annealing by aeolian sediment-Field and remote-sensing investigation of aeolian-hillslope-fluvial interactions  J  B  Sankey    A  E  Draut    10.1016/j.geomorph.2014.05.028     Colorado River corridor  220    2014  Geomorphology  Arizona, USA    Sankey, J.B., and Draut, A.E., 2014, Gully annealing by aeolian sediment-Field and remote-sensing investigation of aeolian-hillslope-fluvial interactions, Colorado River corridor, Arizona, USA: Geomorphology, v. 220, p. 68-80, https://doi.org/ 10.1016/ j. geomorph.2 014.05.028.   Riparian vegetation, Colorado River, and climate-Five decades of spatiotemporal dynamics in the Grand Canyon with river regulation  J  B  Sankey    B  E  Ralston    P  E  Grams    J  C  Schmidt    L  E  Cagney    10.1002/2015JG002991     Journal of Geophysical Research-Biogeosciences  120  8    2015    Sankey, J.B., Ralston, B.E., Grams, P.E., Schmidt, J.C., and Cagney, L.E., 2015, Riparian vegetation, Colorado River, and climate-Five decades of spatiotemporal dynam- ics in the Grand Canyon with river regulation: Journal of Geophysical Research-Biogeosciences, v. 120, no. 8, p. 1532-1547, https://doi.org/ 10.1002/ 2015JG002991.   Influences of life history, environmental gradients, and disturbance on riparian tree regeneration in western Oregon  D  A  Sarr    D  E  Hibbs    J  P A  Shatford    R  Momsen    10.1016/j.foreco.2011.01.002     Forest Ecology and Management  261  7    2011    Sarr, D.A., Hibbs, D.E., Shatford, J.P.A., and Momsen, R., 2011, Influences of life history, environmental gradients, and disturbance on riparian tree regeneration in western Oregon: Forest Ecology and Management, v. 261, no. 7, p. 1241-1253, https://doi.org/ 10.1016/ j.foreco.2011.01.002.   J  C  Schmidt    J  B  Graf    10.3133/pp1493  1493    Aggradation and degradation of alluvial sand deposits, 1965-1986  Colorado River, Grand Canyon National Park, Arizona    U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper  1990  74    Schmidt, J.C., and Graf, J.B., 1990, Aggradation and degrada- tion of alluvial sand deposits, 1965-1986, Colorado River, Grand Canyon National Park, Arizona: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1493, 74 p., https://doi.org/ 10.3133/ pp1493.     J  C  Schmidt    R  H  Webb    R  A  Valdez    G  R  Marzolf    L  E  Stevens    10.2307/1313336     Science and values in river restoration in the Grand Canyon: Bioscience  48  9    1998    Schmidt, J.C., Webb, R.H., Valdez, R.A., Marzolf, G.R., and Stevens, L.E., 1998, Science and values in river restoration in the Grand Canyon: Bioscience, v. 48, no. 9, p. 735-747, https://doi.org/ 10.2307/ 1313336.   Evaluating riparian vegetation change in canyon-bound reaches of the Colorado River using spatially extensive matched photo sets  M  L  Scott    R  H  Webb    R  R  Johnson    R  M  Turner    J  M  Friedman    H  C  Fairley    2018    chap  Scott, M.L., Webb, R.H., Johnson, R.R., Turner, R.M., Friedman, J.M., and Fairley, H.C., 2018, Evaluating riparian vegetation change in canyon-bound reaches of the Colorado River using spatially extensive matched photo sets, chap.   Riparian ecology-Past, present, future  10.2737/RMRS-GTR-377  RMRS-GTR-377    Johnson, R.R., Carothers, S.W., Finch, D.M., and Kingsley, K.J.  226  Fort Collins, Colo., U.   S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, General    Technical Report  of Johnson, R.R., Carothers, S.W., Finch, D.M., and Kingsley, K.J., eds., Riparian ecology-Past, present, future: Fort Collins, Colo., U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-377, 226 p., https://doi.org/ 10.2737/ RMRS-GTR-377.   Riparian bird community ecology in the Grand Canyon-Final report  M  K  Sogge    D  Felley    M  Wotawa    agreement no. 8031-8-0002     U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Reclamation  3  1998  Colorado Plateau Field Station  Flagstaff, Ariz    Sogge, M.K., Felley, D., and Wotawa, M., 1998, Riparian bird community ecology in the Grand Canyon-Final report: U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Reclamation, prepared by U.S. Geological Survey, Colorado Plateau Field Station, Flagstaff, Ariz., under cooperative agreement no. 8031-8-0002, 276 p., 3 app. [Also available at http://www .riversimu lator.org/ Resources/ GCMRC/ Terrestrial/ Sogge1998a.pdf.]   The riparian and aquatic bird communities along the Colorado River from Glen Canyon Dam to Lake Mead  J  R  Spence    1425-98-AA-40-22680   -2000-Final report  Flagstaff, Ariz    National Park Service, Resource Management Division, Glen Canyon National Recreation Area, Page  2006. 1996  283   Grand Canyon Monitoring and Research Center    Ariz., under interagency acquisition  Spence, J.R., 2006, The riparian and aquatic bird communi- ties along the Colorado River from Glen Canyon Dam to Lake Mead, 1996-2000-Final report: Flagstaff, Ariz., U.S. Geological Survey, Grand Canyon Monitoring and Research Center, prepared by National Park Service, Resource Management Division, Glen Canyon National Recreation Area, Page, Ariz., under interagency acquisition no. 1425-98-AA-40-22680, 283 p.   Planned flooding and Colorado River riparian trade-offs downstream from Glen Canyon Dam  L  E  Stevens    T  J  Ayers    J  B  Bennett    K  Christensen    M  J C  Kearsley    V  J  Meretsky    A  M  Phillips    Iii    R  A  Parnell    J  R  Spence    M  K  Sogge    A  E  Springer    D  L  Wegner    J  C  Ayers    T  J  Brown    B  T    10.2307/2269352     Arizona: Ecological Applications  11  3    2001. 1995  Canyon, Arizona    Ecological Applications  Stevens, L.E., Ayers, T.J., Bennett, J.B., Christensen, K., Kearsley, M.J.C., Meretsky, V.J., Phillips, A.M., III, Parnell, R.A., Spence, J.R., Sogge, M.K., Springer, A.E., and Wegner, D.L., 2001, Planned flooding and Colorado River riparian trade-offs downstream from Glen Canyon Dam, Arizona: Ecological Applications, v. 11, no. 3, p. 701-710, https://doi.org/ 10.1890/ 1051-076 1(2001)011 [0701:PFAC RR]2.0.CO; 2. Stevens, L.E., Schmidt, J.C., Ayers, T.J., and Brown, B.T., 1995, Flow regulation, geomorphology, and Colorado River marsh development in the Grand Canyon, Arizona: Ecological Applications, v. 5, no. 4, p. 1025-1039, https://doi.org/ 10.2307/ 2269352.   Effects of prolonged flooding on riparian vegetation in Grand Canyon, in Riparian ecosystems and their management-Reconciling conflicting uses  L  E  Stevens    Waring    G  L     Proceedings for the First North American Riparian Conference  for the First North American Riparian Conference Tucson, Ariz.    1985. April 16-18, 1985    Stevens, L.E., and Waring, G.L., 1985, Effects of prolonged flooding on riparian vegetation in Grand Canyon, in Riparian ecosystems and their management-Reconciling conflicting uses [Proceedings for the First North American Riparian Conference, Tucson, Ariz., April 16-18, 1985]:     Colo    10.2737/RM-GTR-120  RM-120     U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, General  523  Fort Collins    Technical Report  Fort Collins, Colo., U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, General Technical Report RM-120, 523 p., https://doi.org/ 10.2737/ RM-GTR-120.   Effects of post-dam flooding on riparian substrates, vegetation, and invertebrate populations in the Colorado River corridor in Grand Canyon, Arizona-Terrestrial biology of the Glen Canyon Environmental Studies: Salt Lake City, Utah, Bureau of Reclamation, Upper Colorado Region  L  E  Stevens    Waring    G  L     Glen Canyon Environmental Studies report GCES  19  87  175  1986    Stevens, L.E., and Waring, G.L., 1986, Effects of post-dam flooding on riparian substrates, vegetation, and inverte- brate populations in the Colorado River corridor in Grand Canyon, Arizona-Terrestrial biology of the Glen Canyon Environmental Studies: Salt Lake City, Utah, Bureau of Reclamation, Upper Colorado Region, Glen Canyon Environmental Studies report GCES 19/87, 175 p.   Boater preferences for beach characteristics downstream from Glen Canyon Dam  W  Stewart    K  Larkin    B  Orland    D  Anderson    10.1016/j.jenvman.2003.08.001     Arizona: Journal of Environmental Management  69  2    2003    Stewart, W., Larkin, K., Orland, B., and Anderson, D., 2003, Boater preferences for beach characteristics downstream from Glen Canyon Dam, Arizona: Journal of Environmental Management, v. 69, no. 2, p. 201-211, https://doi.org/ 10.1016/ j .jenvman.2 003.08.001.   Riparian floodplain wetlands of the arid and semiarid southwest  J  C  Stromberg    D  C  Andersen    M  L  Scott     Wetland habitats of North America-Ecology and conservation concerns  D  P  Batzer    A  H  Baldwin    Berkeley, University of California Press  2012      Stromberg, J.C., Andersen, D.C., and Scott, M.L., 2012, Riparian floodplain wetlands of the arid and semiarid southwest, in Batzer, D.P., and Baldwin, A.H., eds., Wetland habitats of North America-Ecology and conservation con- cerns: Berkeley, University of California Press, p. 343-356.   Importance of low-flow and highflow characteristics to restoration of riparian vegetation along rivers in arid south-western United States  J  C  Stromberg    V  C  Beauchamp    M  D  Dixon    S  J  Lite    C  Paradzick    10.1111/j.1365-2427.2006.01713.x     Freshwater Biology  52  4    2007    Stromberg, J.C., Beauchamp, V.C., Dixon, M.D., Lite, S.J., and Paradzick, C., 2007, Importance of low-flow and high- flow characteristics to restoration of riparian vegetation along rivers in arid south-western United States: Freshwater Biology, v. 52, no. 4, p. 651-679, https://doi.org/ 10.1111/ j.1365-2427.2006.01713.x.   Dryland riparian ecosystems in the American southwest-Sensitivity and resilience to climatic extremes  J  C  Stromberg    K  E  Mccluney    M  D  Dixon    T  Meixner    10.1007/s10021-012-9606-3     Ecosystems  16  3    2013    Stromberg, J.C., McCluney, K.E., Dixon, M.D., and Meixner, T., 2013, Dryland riparian ecosystems in the American southwest-Sensitivity and resilience to climatic extremes: Ecosystems, v. 16, no. 3, p. 411-415, https://doi.org/ 10.1007/ s10021-012-9606-3.   A century of riparian forest expansion following extreme disturbance-Spatio-temporal change in Populus/Salix/Tamarix forests along the Upper San Pedro River, Arizona  J  C  Stromberg    M  G  Tluczek    A  F  Hazelton    H  Ajami    10.1016/j.foreco.2010.01.005     USA: Forest Ecology and Management  259  6    2010    Stromberg, J.C., Tluczek, M.G., Hazelton, A.F., and Ajami, H., 2010, A century of riparian forest expansion follow- ing extreme disturbance-Spatio-temporal change in Populus/Salix/Tamarix forests along the Upper San Pedro River, Arizona, USA: Forest Ecology and Management, v. 259, no. 6, p. 1181-1189, https://doi.org/ 10.1016/ j.foreco.2010.01.005.   Development, maintenance and role of riparian vegetation in the river landscape  E  Tabacchi    D  L  Correll    R  Hauer    G  Pinay    A.-M  Planty-Tabacchi    R  C  Wissmar    10.1046/j.1365-2427.1998.00381.x     Freshwater Biology  40  3    1998    Tabacchi, E., Correll, D.L., Hauer, R., Pinay, G., Planty- Tabacchi, A.-M., and Wissmar, R.C., 1998, Development, maintenance and role of riparian vegetation in the river landscape: Freshwater Biology, v. 40, no. 3, p. 497-516, https://doi.org/ 10.1046/ j.1365-2427.1998.00381.x.   Computation and analysis of the instantaneous-discharge record for the Colorado River at Lees Ferry  D  J  Topping    J  C  Schmidt    L  E  Vierra    10.3133/pp1677  1677    2003. May 8, 1921. September 30, 2000  U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper  118  Arizona    Topping, D.J., Schmidt, J.C., and Vierra, L.E., 2003, Computation and analysis of the instantaneous-discharge record for the Colorado River at Lees Ferry, Arizona-May 8, 1921, through September 30, 2000: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1677, 118 p., https://doi.org/ 10.3133/ pp1677.   Recent vegetation changes along the Colorado River between Glen Canyon Dam and Lake Mead  R  M  Turner    M  M  Karpiscak    10.3133/pp1132     U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper  1132  125  1980  Arizona    Turner, R.M., and Karpiscak, M.M., 1980, Recent vegeta- tion changes along the Colorado River between Glen Canyon Dam and Lake Mead, Arizona: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1132, 125 p., https://doi.org/ 10.3133/ pp1132.   Department of the Interior  U  S       Record of decision for the Glen Canyon Dam Long-Term Experimental and Management Plan Final Environmental Impact Statement: Salt Lake City, Utah  Upper Colorado Region, and Lakewood, Colo    National Park Service, Intermountain Region  2016  196    U.S. Department of the Interior, 2016, Record of decision for the Glen Canyon Dam Long-Term Experimental and Management Plan Final Environmental Impact Statement: Salt Lake City, Utah, U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, Upper Colorado Region, and Lakewood, Colo., National Park Service, Intermountain Region, 196 p. [Available at https ://ltempei s.anl.gov/ documents/ docs/ LTEMP_ ROD.pdf.]   years 2018-2020    Glen Canyon Dam Adaptive Management Program triennial budget and work plan-Fiscal  Salt Lake City, Utah; Flagstaff, Ariz.    Grand Canyon Monitoring and Research Center  2017. September 11, 2017  316   U.S. Department of the Interior    , final draft. Available at h ttps  U.S. Department of the Interior, 2017, Glen Canyon Dam Adaptive Management Program triennial budget and work plan-Fiscal years 2018-2020 [September 11, 2017, final draft]: Salt Lake City, Utah, Bureau of Reclamation, Upper Colorado Regional Office, and Flagstaff, Ariz., U.S. Geological Survey, Grand Canyon Monitoring and Research Center, 316 p. [Available at h ttps://www .usbr.gov/ uc/ progact/ amp/ amwg/ 2017-09-20-amwg-meeting/ Attach_ 04a.pdf.]     Glen Canyon Dam Adaptive Management Program triennial budget and work plan  Salt Lake City, Utah; Flagstaff, Ariz., U.    Bureau of Reclamation, Upper Colorado Regional Office  2020. September 4, 2020  418   U.S. Department of the Interior ; S. Geological Survey, Grand Canyon Monitoring and Research Center    -Fiscal years 2021-2023. , final draft  U.S. Department of the Interior, 2020, Glen Canyon Dam Adaptive Management Program triennial budget and work plan-Fiscal years 2021-2023 [September 4, 2020, final draft]: Salt Lake City, Utah, Bureau of Reclamation, Upper Colorado Regional Office, and Flagstaff, Ariz., U.S. Geological Survey, Grand Canyon Monitoring and Research Center, 418 p. [Available at http://gcdamp.com/ images_ gcdamp_ com/ 5/ 53/ 1-GCMRC_ TWP2021-23_ SEPT- FINAL-v3.pdf.   Tolerance of five riparian plants from the lower Colorado River to salinity drought and inundation  M  W  Vandersande    E  P  Glenn    J  L  Walworth    10.1006/jare.2001.0839     Journal of Arid Environments  49  1    2001    Vandersande, M.W., Glenn, E.P., and Walworth, J.L., 2001, Tolerance of five riparian plants from the lower Colorado River to salinity drought and inundation: Journal of Arid Environments, v. 49, no. 1, p. 147-159, https://doi.org/ 10.1006/ jare.2001.0839.   R  H  Webb    Grand Canyon-A century of change-Rephotography of the 1889-1890 Stanton expedition  Tucson, University of Arizona Press  1996  290    Webb, R.H., 1996, Grand Canyon-A century of change- Rephotography of the 1889-1890 Stanton expedition: Tucson, University of Arizona Press, 290 p.   Long-term change in perennial vegetation along the Colorado River in Grand Canyon National Park  R  H  Webb    J  Belnap    M  L  Scott    T  C  Esque     Park Science  28  2    2011. 1889. 2010    Webb, R.H., Belnap, J., Scott, M.L., and Esque, T.C., 2011, Long-term change in perennial vegetation along the Colorado River in Grand Canyon National Park (1889-2010): Park Science, v. 28, no. 2, p. 83-87.   Ground-water surfacewater interactions and long-term change in riverine riparian vegetation in the southwestern United States  R  H  Webb    S  A  Leake    10.1016/j.jhydrol.2005.07.022     Journal of Hydrology  320  3-4    2006    Webb, R.H., and Leake, S.A., 2006, Ground-water surface- water interactions and long-term change in riverine ripar- ian vegetation in the southwestern United States: Journal of Hydrology, v. 320, no. 3-4, p. 302-323, https://doi.org/ 10.1016/ j .jhydrol.2 005.07.022.   Downstream effects of Glen Canyon Dam in Grand Canyon-A review  R  H  Webb    D  L  Wegner    E  D  Andrews    R  A  Valdez    D  T  Patten    10.1029/GM110p0001     The controlled flood in Grand Canyon: Geophysical Monograph Series  R  H  Webb    J  C  Schmidt    G  R  Marzolf    R  A  Valdez    Washington, D.C.    American Geophysical Union  1999  110      Webb, R.H., Wegner, D.L., Andrews, E.D., Valdez, R.A., and Patten, D.T., 1999, Downstream effects of Glen Canyon Dam in Grand Canyon-A review, in Webb, R.H., Schmidt, J.C., Marzolf, G.R., and Valdez, R.A., eds., The controlled flood in Grand Canyon: Geophysical Monograph Series 110: Washington, D.C., American Geophysical Union, p. 1-21, https://doi.org/ 10.1029/ GM110p0001.   Dams and canyons disrupt gene flow among populations of a threatened riparian plant  S  Werth    M  Schödl    C  Scheidegger    10.1111/fwb.12449     Freshwater Biology  59  12    2014    Werth, S., Schödl, M., and Scheidegger, C., 2014, Dams and canyons disrupt gene flow among populations of a threat- ened riparian plant: Freshwater Biology, v. 59, no. 12, p. 2502-2515, https://doi.org/ 10.1111/ fwb.12449.   

     