ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 21 January 2021
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2020.618552
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
1
January 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 618552
Edited by:
Trygve Tollefsbol,
University of Alabama at Birmingham,
United States
Reviewed by:
Vanesa Muncan,
University of Amsterdam, Netherlands
Charles Giardina,
University of Connecticut,
United States
*Correspondence:
Jenny Ostrop
jenny.ostrop@ntnu.no
Menno J. Oudhoff
menno.oudhoff@ntnu.no
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Epigenomics and Epigenetics,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental
Biology
Received: 19 October 2020
Accepted: 16 December 2020
Published: 21 January 2021
Citation:
Ostrop J, Zwiggelaar RT, Terndrup
Pedersen M, Gerbe F, Bösl K,
Lindholm HT, Díez-Sánchez A,
Parmar N, Radetzki S, von Kries JP,
Jay P, Jensen KB, Arrowsmith C and
Oudhoff MJ (2021) A Semi-automated
Organoid Screening Method
Demonstrates Epigenetic Control of
Intestinal Epithelial Differentiation.
Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 8:618552.
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2020.618552
A Semi-automated Organoid
Screening Method Demonstrates
Epigenetic Control of Intestinal
Epithelial Differentiation
Jenny Ostrop 1*, Rosalie T. Zwiggelaar 1, Marianne Terndrup Pedersen 2,3, François Gerbe 4,
Korbinian Bösl 5, Håvard T. Lindholm 1, Alberto Díez-Sánchez 1, Naveen Parmar 1,
Silke Radetzki 6, Jens Peter von Kries 6, Philippe Jay 4, Kim B. Jensen 2,3,
Cheryl Arrowsmith 7,8,9 and Menno J. Oudhoff 1*
1 Centre of Molecular Inﬂammation Research (CEMIR), Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine (IKOM), NTNU -
Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway, 2 BRIC - Biotech Research and Innovation Centre,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3 Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Stem Cell Biology, Faculty of
Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 4 Cancer Biology Department, Institute of
Functional Genomics, University of Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 5 Department of Bioinformatics, Computational Biological
Unit, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway, 6 Screening Unit, Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie,
Berlin, Germany, 7 Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 8 Princess Margaret Cancer
Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada, 9 Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto,
ON, Canada
Intestinal organoids are an excellent model to study epithelial biology. Yet, the selection of
analytical tools to accurately quantify heterogeneous organoid cultures remains limited.
Here, we developed a semi-automated organoid screening method, which we applied
to a library of highly speciﬁc chemical probes to identify epigenetic regulators of intestinal
epithelial biology. The role of epigenetic modiﬁers in adult stem cell systems, such
as the intestinal epithelium, is still undeﬁned. Based on this resource dataset, we
identiﬁed several targets that affected epithelial cell differentiation, including HDACs,
EP300/CREBBP, LSD1, and type I PRMTs, which were veriﬁed by complementary
methods. For example, we show that inhibiting type I PRMTs, which leads enhanced
epithelial differentiation, blocks the growth of adenoma but not normal organoid cultures.
Thus, epigenetic probes are powerful tools to study intestinal epithelial biology and may
have therapeutic potential.
Keywords: organoids, epigenetic modiﬁers, intestinal stem cell biology, bioimage analysis, PRMT1, EP300,
CREBBP
INTRODUCTION
The intestinal epithelium, a single layer of cells, faces the challenge of both providing a barrier
against pathogens while also being responsible for the uptake of nutrients and water. One of
the hallmarks of intestinal epithelium is the rapid turnover of 3–5 days, which is driven by
LGR5+ intestinal stem cells (ISCs) that reside at the bottom of crypts. ISCs are continuously
dividing and give rise to progenitor cells, which diﬀerentiate into specialized intestinal epithelial
cell (IEC) lineages such as absorptive enterocytes and secretory lineages such as mucus-producing
goblet cells, antimicrobial-producing Paneth cells, hormone-secreting enteroendocrine cells, and
chemosensory tuft cells (Gehart and Clevers, 2019). The intestinal epithelium exhibits high
plasticity in respond to challenges (Haber et al., 2017; Jadhav et al., 2017). On the other hand, it is
Ostrop et al.
Epigenetic Regulation of Intestinal Epithelium
vulnerable to tumorigenesis with colorectal cancer being the
second leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide.
The balance between ISC proliferation and IEC diﬀerentiation
is controlled by pathways including WNT, BMP, and NOTCH
(Gehart and Clevers, 2019). Speciﬁc transcription factors, such
as ATOH1, are critically required for acquisition of IEC eﬀector
lineage identities (Yang et al., 2001). Gene expression is further
determined by the chromatin landscape. It is known that
epigenetic marks such as methylated DNA and histone tail
modiﬁcations diﬀer strongly between fetal and adult intestine
(Kazakevych et al., 2017; Jadhav et al., 2019), and can be altered
in intestinal pathologies (Ray and Longworth, 2019). While the
requirement of epigenetic modiﬁcations for embryonic stem cell
diﬀerentiation (Atlasi and Stunnenberg, 2017) and diﬀerentiation
and maturation of immune cells (Álvarez-Errico et al., 2015)
has been extensively studied, their role for maintenance of
intestinal homeostasis is debated. Both a permissive chromatin
structure and regulation of IEC lineage diﬀerentiation by
transcription factors, and a control of gene expression patterns
by the chromatin states itself have been proposed as conﬂicting
models (extensively reviewed by Elliott and Kaestner, 2015). The
classic NOTCH-mediated lateral inhibition model of ISC-to-
IEC diﬀerentiation has been attributed to a broadly permissive
chromatin landscape, supporting the idea of regulation by
transcription factors as the most deﬁning factor (Kim et al.,
2014). However, other studies suggest that ISC diﬀerentiation
and the de-diﬀerentiation of lineage-deﬁned IECs back to ISCs
are mediated by changes in DNA methylation and chromatin
accessibility (Kaaij et al., 2013; Sheaﬀer et al., 2014; Jadhav
et al., 2017; Kazakevych et al., 2017). Several hundred epigenetic
modiﬁcation enzymes contribute to writing, erasing, and reading
the epigenetic code (Arrowsmith et al., 2012). Currently, the
investigation of the role of epigenetic modiﬁers in the intestinal
epithelium depends mostly on labor-intensive mouse models
with conditional genetic deletion, allowing for the examination
of one or few epigenetic modiﬁers at the same time (Gonneaud
et al., 2016b; Koppens et al., 2016). A higher throughput could
be achieved by using organoids to investigate epigenetic eﬀects in
the intestinal epithelium (Kraiczy and Zilbauer, 2019). Curated
by the Structural Genomics Consortium, an openly accessible
chemical probe library targeting epigenetic modiﬁcation enzymes
with high selectivity and speciﬁcity became available recently
(Ackloo et al., 2017; Scheer et al., 2019). Treating organoids with
this chemical probe library will enable a direct comparison of the
putative requirement of many epigenetic modiﬁers for epithelial
homeostasis or diﬀerentiation of IEC lineages.
Heterogeneous organoid cultures are quite sensitive to
subtle changes in handling and culture conditions. Therefore,
development of quantitative analysis methods for reproducible
quantiﬁcation of a whole organoid population instead of relying
on representative example data points is crucial (Huch et al.,
2017). Indeed, this has recently led to specialized studies such
as using light-sheet microscopy to elegantly deﬁne symmetry
breaking (Serra et al., 2019), using single-cell RNA sequencing
(scRNA-seq) to describe epithelial responses to immune cues
(Haber et al., 2017; Biton et al., 2018), or analysis of single
intestinal organoids in microcavity arrays (Brandenberg et al.,
2020). However, these techniques are costly and the required
instrumentation and data analysis pipelines are not widely
available to the research community. Thus, quantitative but cost-
eﬃcient tools based on standard laboratory equipment that can
be scaled to screen setups need to be established.
Here, we provide a semi-automated organoid quantiﬁcation
method suitable for screening experiments and designed to
be used in laboratories with a standard infrastructure. To
widely investigate the role of epigenetic modiﬁers for adult
intestinal epithelial homeostasis, we combined this toolbox
with a chemical probe library consisting of 39 inhibitors that
target epigenetic modiﬁcation enzymes with high selectivity and
speciﬁcity (Scheer et al., 2019). From this screen dataset, we
identiﬁed several mediators of IEC biology that we veriﬁed with
complementary methods. We envision that this resource will be
useful for the research community and will lay basis for further
mechanistic investigation. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁnd new regulators of
organoid size related to ISC frequency, as well as new regulators
of IEC diﬀerentiation. Finally, we explore the potential of some
of these probes for treatment of intestinal cancer by application
on intestinal tumor organoids.
RESULTS
Development of a Toolbox to Quantify
Intestinal Organoid Growth and Cellular
Composition
A decade after its establishment by Sato et al. (2009), the
use of intestinal organoids has been become a standard
in the method repertoire. However, accurately quantifying
heterogeneous organoid cultures remains a challenge and the
analytical tools available to a broad community, especially for
screening purposes, remain limited or labor intensive. We
thus initiated a small intestinal (SI) organoid system that,
similar to the original work, starts with freshly isolated crypts
that self-organize into budding organoids by day 4 (96 h
after seeding), which can be split and propagated (Figure 1A,
Supplementary Figure 1a). We next designed a setup to daily
acquire bright-ﬁeld z-stack images of the whole extracellular
matrix (Matrigel droplet) in a well, followed by automatic
segmentation and quantiﬁcation of all individual organoids based
on the open-source tools ImageJ/Fiji and Ilastik (Figure 1B).
Based on edge detection in each stack layer, this workﬂow can
be used to robustly quantify organoid size (object area) and
classify, e.g., by determining intensity, organoid phenotypes over
time (Figure 1C, Supplementary Figures 1b,c). The workﬂow is
robust to changes in morphology, stitching artifacts, and can be
adjusted to image data from diﬀerent automated microscopes.
As the object classiﬁcation by Ilastik is not dependent on deep
learning and extensive training data, it can easily be adapted to
new phenotypes and changes in experimental conditions.
In addition to determining organoid size, the cellular
composition is of critical interest. We therefore selected
transcripts that are speciﬁc for individual IEC lineages (Haber
et al., 2017), and performed qRT-PCR on these within a
24–96 h time course (Figure 1D). Except for the enterocyte
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
2
January 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 618552
Ostrop et al.
Epigenetic Regulation of Intestinal Epithelium
FIGURE 1 | Quantiﬁcation of intestinal organoid growth and cellular composition. (A) Scheme of organoid formation and images of a representative position 24–96 h
after seeding. Whole well is shown in Supplementary Figure 1a. (B) Scheme of organoid size quantiﬁcation workﬂow using open-source tools ImageJ/Fiji and Ilastik.
Visual quantiﬁcation output and ImageJ quantiﬁcation results are shown in Supplementary Figures 1b,c. (C) Box plots showing organoid size quantiﬁed as object
area at 24–96 h timepoints (top). Object area vs. object mean gray value (8-bit scale) on a minimum projection of the image stack (bottom). Pooled data from 2 biol.
replicates, indicated by shape. Each dot represents one organoid. (D) mRNA expression of IEC lineage marker genes at 24–96 h timepoints, measured by qRT-PCR.
xfold change relative to 96 h organoids, median of 3 biol. replicates. (E) Flow cytometry of organoids grown for 48 and 96 h. Staining of representative replicate
(bottom right). Population frequencies in Cells parent gate, 3 biol. replicates, indicated by shape. Mean highlighted (bottom left). Log2 fold change relative to 96 h
timepoint, median of 3 biol. replicates. Dot size corresponds to absolute log2 fold change (top left). Gating strategy and population frequencies for FSC_CD326hi and
FSC_CD24+ parent gates are shown in Supplementary Figures 1d,e. (F) Organoids cultured for 48 h followed by 72 h (48 h_72 h) with normal culture medium
(ENR_ENR), or culture medium containing CHIR+VPA_CHIR+VPA, CHIR+VPA_CHIR+DAPT, or CHIR+VPA_IWP2+DAPT to modify IEC composition by interfering with
Wnt and Notch signaling pathways as indicated, adapted from Yin et al. (2014). mRNA expression measured by qRT-PCR. xfold change relative to ENR_ENR
treatment. 3 biol. replicates, indicated by shape. Mean highlighted. (G) Flow cytometry of organoids treated for 48_72h as indicated, population frequencies
normalized to ENR_ENR treatment. Log2 fold change, median of 3 biol. replicates. Dot size corresponds to absolute log2 fold change. Gating strategy, representative
staining and population frequencies for FSC_CD326hi and FSC_CD24+ parent gates are shown in Supplementary Figures 1d,f–h.
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
3
January 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 618552
Ostrop et al.
Epigenetic Regulation of Intestinal Epithelium
marker Alpi, we generally ﬁnd an increase in lineage-speciﬁc
gene expression over time cumulating at 96 h (Figure 1D).
This corresponds to the transition from spheroids, consisting
mainly of progenitors, to mature budding organoids that
contain more diﬀerentiated lineages, as was shown previously
(Serra et al., 2019). As a complementary technique to quantify
cellular composition on a single-cell level, we conducted ﬂow
cytometry of commonly used IEC surface markers (Figure 1E,
Supplementary Figures 1d,e). The diﬀerences between 48 and
96 h organoids were modest (Figure 1E). Of note, we observed
that the frequency of Ulex europaeus agglutinin 1 (UEA1) positive
cells reduced over time, indicating that the population expressing
UEA1 on the surface may be progenitor cells that are diﬀerent
from the population of UEA1bright secretory cells commonly
detected by immunoﬂuorescence staining of permeabilized tissue
(Figure 1E). As a proof of principle, we next tested our approach
on organoids with an altered cell composition. Interfering with
WNT and NOTCH signaling pathways has previously been
established by Yin and colleagues as a method to enrich organoids
for stem cells, Paneth cells, goblet cells, or enteroendocrine cells
(Yin et al., 2014). WNT and NOTCH pathways are activated
or respectively inhibited by treatment with combinations of
the glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) inhibitor CHIR99021
(CHIR), valproic acid (VPA), the porcupine inhibitor IWP2,
or the gamma-secretase inhibitor DAPT (Yin et al., 2014)
(Figure 1F). Interestingly, we found that incubation with CHIR
+ VPA followed by IWP2 + DAPT increased the expression of
tuft cell marker genes in addition to the previously described
eﬀects on goblet cells and enteroendocrine cells (Figure 1F).
Drastic eﬀects on the cell composition were reﬂected by
widely altered surface marker expression measured by ﬂow
cytometry and resulted in characteristic patterns (Figure 1G,
Supplementary Figures 1d,f,g). However, we observed that well
established ﬂow cytometry gating strategies, such as identifying
Paneth cells by a SSChi_CD24+ gate (Sato et al., 2011),
did not follow the Lyz1 gene expression pattern in some
conditions (Figure 1F, Supplementary Figure 1h). Thus, while
ﬂow cytometry demonstrates to be very useful to detect
changes in the organoid composition, surface marker expression
may be inﬂuenced by additional factors, such as the growth
conditions, and identiﬁcation of certain cell populations by
ﬂow cytometry requires appropriate controls. In summary, we
developed an easy-to-use and cost-eﬃcient toolbox for the
analysis of (intestinal) organoids that is suitable to detect changes
in organoid growth and cell composition.
Organoid Screen of Epigenetic Modiﬁer
Inhibitors Identiﬁes Established Drugs
Targeting Cancer Growth
Next, we applied our organoid toolbox for screening of a
chemical probe library that targets epigenetic modiﬁers to
modulate the epigenome (Scheer et al., 2019). Organoids
generated from 4 individual mice were grown in the presence
of 39 inhibitors, with DMSO vehicle and VPA serving as
controls (Figures 2A,B). Samples were imaged daily and
expression of 12 transcripts speciﬁc for IEC lineages (Haber
et al., 2017) was analyzed at the 96 h endpoint (Figure 2A).
We observed that some of the probes signiﬁcantly aﬀected
organoid
growth
as
determined
by
area
(Figures 2C,D,
Supplementary Figures 2a–c, 3A). Integration of the primary
readouts revealed a strong correlation of organoid size and
expression of the ISC marker gene Lgr5 (Figure 2E). We found
three probes that reduced both organoid size and Lgr5 mRNA
expression, namely the pan-Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase
(PARP) inhibitor olaparib and two histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors LAQ824 (Dacinostat), a pan-HDAC inhibitor, and
CI-994 (Tacedinaline), an HDAC1-3 and HDAC8 inhibitor
(Figures 2C–E, Supplementary Figures 2b,c) (Weisberg et al.,
2004; Beckers et al., 2007; Mateo et al., 2019). These ﬁndings are
in agreement with a study that showed reduced growth and Lgr5
gene expression but a gain of enterocyte marker expression in
CI-994 treated organoids (Gonneaud et al., 2016a). Olaparib-
treated organoids would suﬃciently grow to perform ﬂow
cytometry. This allowed us to use Lgr5-EGFP expressing reporter
organoids to conﬁrm the reduced Lgr5 gene expression levels.
Indeed, we found markedly fewer GFP-high/GFP-positive cells
in olaparib-treated compared to control organoids (Figure 2F,
Supplementary Figure 2d). Finally, we treated Adenomatous
polyposis coli (Apc) knockout organoids, which are a model for
intestinal cancer, with the two HDAC inhibitors and olaparib
and found that these probes also limited growth in these tumor
cultures, with similar growth reductions compared to WT
organoids (Figure 2G). Together, this is well in line with the
design goal of these probes to limit cellular growth to target
cancer cells.
Inhibition of EP300/CREBBP Enhances
Organoid Size and Lgr5 Expression
We
next
focused
on
probes
that
increased
organoid
size
(Figures 2B–D).
We
found
that
both
SGC-CBP30
and
I-CBP112
signiﬁcantly
increased
the
organoid
area
(Supplementary Figure 3a) and this increase was seen in
objects that were classiﬁed as “Organoids” and thus was not
dependent on the occurrence of large spheres (Figure 3A,
Supplementary Figure 3b). In support of the sensitivity of our
assay, both probes have the same targets: EP300/CREBBP. E1A
Binding Protein P300 (EP300, P300) and Creb-binding protein
(CREBBP, CBP) are closely related bromodomain-containing
acetyltransferases that serve as transcriptional co-activators for
numerous transcription factors (Goodman and Smolik, 2000;
Ramos et al., 2010; Raisner et al., 2018). Both SCG-CBP30
and I-CBP112 speciﬁcally target the bromodomain-binding
domain, which thus renders these proteins unable to bind
acetylated lysines. The observed increase in organoid size was
surprising since both inhibitors have been designed to cause
growth restriction in cancer cells (Hay et al., 2014; Picaud et al.,
2015; Attar and Kurdistani, 2017). Comparing SGC-CBP30/I-
CBP112-treated organoids with the DMSO vehicle control,
organoid morphology appeared normal, however, we observed
a reduction of putative goblet/Paneth cells as determined by
cytosolic UEA1 staining (Figure 3B, Supplementary Figure 3c).
We next tested whether these probes would expand the LGR5+
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
4
January 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 618552
Ostrop et al.
Epigenetic Regulation of Intestinal Epithelium
FIGURE 2 | Organoid screen of epigenetics probes identiﬁes established cancer drugs. (A) Scheme of screen setup and follow-up experiments. (B) Inhibitors used in
screen, detailed information is provided in Supplementary Table 1. Probes used in follow-up experiments are highlighted. Abbreviations of inhibitor target families
(inhibitor class): BRD, bromodomain; BET, bromodomain and extra-terminal motif; HAT, histone acetyltransferase; KDM, lysine demethylase; PMT, protein
methyltransferase; KMT, lysine methyltransferase; PRMT, protein arginine methyltransferase; MBT, malignant brain tumor; HDAC, histone deacetylase. (C) Median
object area of organoids treated with DMSO or inhibitors for 0–96 h. Median of 4 biol. replicates. Boxplots for each inhibitor and timepoint are shown in
Supplementary Figure 2a. Probes that altered organoid size and were followed-up are highlighted: Controls, CI-994, LAQ824 (HDAC inhibitors), olaparib (PARP
inhibitor), SGC-CBP30, I-CBP112 (BRD_BET inhibitors). (D) Representative replicates, 96 h timepoint. (E) Correlation of median organoid size and relative Lgr5 gene
expression, median of 4 biol. replicates. Pearson coefﬁcient. (F) Frequency of Lgr5-EGFP stem cells in reporter organoids treated with DMSO or olaparib for 96 h.
Gating of representative replicate (top) and percentage of GFPhi cells, normalized to DMSO control. 5 biol. replicates, indicated by shape. Mean highlighted. Minimum
5,000 viable cells in parent gate. Paired t-test (bottom). Percentage of total GFP+ cells is shown in Supplementary Figure 2d. (G) Apc-deﬁcient adenomas treated
with DMSO, CI-994, LAQ824, or olaparib for 96 h. Representative replicate (top) and quantiﬁcation of object size in 7/3/3/7 (DMSO/CI-994/LAQ828/olaparib)
individual wells (bottom).
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
5
January 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 618552
Ostrop et al.
Epigenetic Regulation of Intestinal Epithelium
FIGURE 3 | Inhibition of EP300/CREBBP enhances organoid size and Lgr5 expression. (A) Organoids treated with DMSO, SCG-CBP30, or I-CBP112 for 96 h. Area
of objects classiﬁed as “Organoid” by combined ImageJ/Ilastik workﬂow. 4 biol. replicates, indicated by shape. (B) Representative organoids treated with DMSO,
SCG-CBP30, or I-CBP112 for 96 h. 10x magniﬁcation, max. intensity projection. KI67 staining marks crypt regions (top). Density of UEA1+ cells, each value
represents the median of ≥5 organoids quantiﬁed. 3/2/3 biol. replicates, indicated by shape. Mean highlighted (bottom). Full wells for one representative replicate is
shown in Supplementary Figure 3c. (C) Frequency of Lgr5-EGFP stem cells in reporter organoids grown in ENR or ENR+CHIR and treated with DMSO,
SCG-CBP30, or I-CBP112 for 96 h, measured by ﬂow cytometry. Gating of representative replicate grown in ENR (top) and percentage of GFPhi cells normalized to
ENR DMSO condition of 3 biol. replicates, indicated by shape. Mean highlighted. Paired t-test (bottom). Percentage of total GFP+ cells is shown in
Supplementary Figure 3d. (D) Volcano plot of mRNA sequencing of untreated vs. I-CBP112 treated organoids, 4 biol replicates per group. Selected genes are
highlighted. (E) mRNA sequencing of untreated vs. I-CBP112 treated organoids. GSEA of LGR5+ stem cell signature from Muñoz et al. (2012) (GSE33949).
Normalized enrichment score (NES) and false discovery rate (FDR) are indicated.
cell population in Lgr5-EGFP organoids and found a modest
increase upon treatment, either alone or in combination with our
positive control CHIR, an activator of canonical WNT signaling
(Figure 3C, Supplementary Figures 3d,e). However, incubation
with SGC-CBP30 or I-CBP112 could not enhance organoid
growth under low EGF concentrations, replace R-Spondin in
the culture medium, or overcome treatment with the WNT
inhibitor IWP2 (Supplementary Figures 3f,g). To determine
which genes are under the control of EP300/CREBBP in the
intestinal epithelium, we performed mRNA sequencing on
untreated vs. I-CBP112 treated organoid cultures. In accordance
with a transcriptional co-activator role for EP300/CREBBP,
we found 53 genes upregulated and 110 genes downregulated
using a log2 fold change cutoﬀof 0.5 and padjust ≤0.01
(Figure 3D). Furthermore, signatures of transcription factors
known to interact with either EP300 or CREBBP were negatively
enriched
(Supplementary Figure 3h).
Remarkably,
Lgr5
was the most signiﬁcantly upregulated gene in our dataset,
substantiating our previous results (Figure 3D). In support,
gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) with a LGR5+ stem
cell gene set (Muñoz et al., 2012) showed positive correlation
(Figure 3E). The second most signiﬁcantly upregulated gene
was Egr1 (Figure 3D), which is an inducible transcription factor
that is involved in cell proliferation (Gitenay and Baron, 2009).
The expansion of ISCs or progenitors appears to come at a
cost to the diﬀerentiation of other cell lineages. We observed
reduced UEA1 staining and downregulation of goblet cell
markers such as Muc4 and Ccl6 following EP300/CREBBP
inhibition (Figures 3B,D). This is further supported by the
negative correlation with secretory cell gene sets by GSEA
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
6
January 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 618552
Ostrop et al.
Epigenetic Regulation of Intestinal Epithelium
(Supplementary Figure 3i). Conversely, this is in line with
positive enrichment of Gene Ontology biological process
(GO:BP) terms such as smoothened signaling pathway and tissue
morphogenesis (Supplementary Figures 3j,k). Irrespective of
the exact mechanism, we demonstrate that the paradoxical
increase of organoid size after inhibition of EP300/CREBBP
bromodomains may be explained by upregulation of Lgr5, Egr1,
and genes associated with developmental processes, at the cost of
IEC diﬀerentiation.
GSK-LSD1 Broadly Affects IEC
Composition
So far, we have used organoid size as a probe selection criteria.
Additionally, we performed qRT-PCR on 12 genes associated
with speciﬁc cell lineages (Haber et al., 2017). We found
that, after our positive control VPA, treatment with GSK-
LSD1 leads to the largest perturbation of the IEC lineage
marker proﬁle as determined by calculating the Euclidean
distance of the gene expression xfold changes relative to
DMSO treatment (Figure 4A, Supplementary Figures 4a,f–k).
Flow cytometry screening of inhibitor treated organoids showed
primarily moderate changes in surface marker expressions
(Supplementary Figures 4b,c). Although GSK484 and SGC0946
caused the most perturbation in surface marker populations, they
showed little eﬀect by qRT-PCR and thus we did not pursue
these probes further (Supplementary Figures 4d,e). Treatment
with GSK-LSD1 markedly reduced gene expression of Paneth and
goblet cell markers, but caused an increase in enteroendocrine
and tuft cell marker genes, particularly Gﬁ1b (Figure 4B). This
supports our recent work in which we found that Lysine-
speciﬁc Demethylase 1A (LSD1, KDM1A) is required for Paneth
cell diﬀerentiation and contributes to goblet cell diﬀerentiation
(Parmar et al., 2020; Zwiggelaar et al., 2020). Paneth cells
are commonly gated as SSChi CD24+ population in ﬂow
cytometry (Sato et al., 2011). In line with a strong reduction
of the Paneth cell marker genes Lyz1 and Defa22, we ﬁnd this
population signiﬁcantly reduced in GSK-LSD1 treated organoids
(Figures 4B,C). Furthermore, we observed that the pattern of
CD24+ expressing cells in GSK-LSD1 treated organoids diﬀers
from control organoids in ﬂow cytometry, with increase of a
SSClo_CD24hi population (Figure 4C). This pattern change was
even more pronounced in SI crypt IECs from Villin-Cre+ Lsd1f/f
mice, which conditionally lack Lsd1 in IECs, compared to wild
type (WT) littermates (Figure 4D). Similar gating has previously
been associated with enteroendocrine cells and their progenitors
(Sato et al., 2011), which thus ﬁts with our previous observation
that enteroendocrine progenitors such as Neurod1 and Neurog3
are upregulated in Villin-Cre+ Lsd1f/f mice (Zwiggelaar et al.,
2020). However, upon performing intracellular ﬂow cytometry
staining for the canonical tuft cell marker DCLK1, we found
that also a DCLK1hi population fell within this gate and is
increased in Lsd1-deﬁcient crypts (Figure 4E). In support, there
was a modest yet signiﬁcant increase of DCLK1+ cells in
duodenal tissue sections as well as colon sections from Villin-
Cre+ Lsd1f/f mice compared to WT littermates (Figure 4F,
Supplementary Figure 4l). Together, this example highlights
that the epigenetic probe library contains inhibitors that are able
to completely mimic the phenotype that is seen upon genetic
deletion in vivo.
BET Inhibition Reduces Relative
Abundance of Tuft Cells
Secretory cell lineage diﬀerentiation, such as goblet and Paneth
cells, is well-studied and is generally thought to involve NOTCH-
mediated lateral inhibition. Tuft cell diﬀerentiation, however,
is less deﬁned. Therefore, we next focused on the BRD/BET
inhibitors (+)-JQ1 and bromosporine in our marker gene
expression dataset (Figure 4A) as treatment with these led to a
strong reduction of tuft cell marker genes Dclk1, Trpm5, and
Gﬁ1b (Figure 5A). Organoids treated with these probes also had
altered expression in some of the other IEC lineage marker
genes, but the downregulation of tuft cell marker genes was
consistent and prominent (Supplementary Figure 5a). Although
probe A-366, an inhibitor of Euchromatic histone-lysine N-
methyltransferase 1 and 2 (EHMT1/2, GLP/G9A) also reduced
tuft cell marker genes, two other EHMT1/2 inhibitors, UNC0638
and UNC0642, did not (Figure 4A, Supplementary Figure 4k).
(+)-JQ1 inhibits Bromodomain-containing protein 2 (BRD2),
BRD3, BRD4, and BRDT while bromosporine is a pan-
bromodomain inhibitor. In our hands, these two probes did
not aﬀect overall organoid growth in the 96 h course of the
screen experiment (Supplementary Figures 2a, 5B), but (+)-
JQ1 treatment aﬀected organoid morphology when inhibitor
treatment was continued after passaging (Figure 5B). Others
have reported that (+)-JQ1 treatment strongly reduced the
eﬃciency of crypts to form organoids (Bolden et al., 2014).
Tuft cell quantiﬁcation after treatment of Hpgds2-tdTomato
reporter organoids indeed conﬁrmed a complete lack of tuft
cell diﬀerentiation in organoids treated with either (+)-JQ1
or bromosporine (Figures 5B,C), suggesting that BRD proteins
are necessary for the tuft cell lineage. BRD2, BRD3, BRD4,
and BRDT are mutual targets of (+)-JQ1 and bromosporine,
of which BRDT is not expressed in SI crytps or organoids
(Supplementary Figure 5c). Interestingly, the BRD2/4 inhibitor
PFI-1 did not cause marked changes in tuft cell marker
gene expression in our screen (Supplementary Figure 5d). To
investigate the role of speciﬁc BRDs in tuft cell diﬀerentiation in
future studies may be worthwile.
Inhibition of Type I PRMTs Results in
Higher Relative Abundance of Secretory
Cells and Prevents Growth of Tumor
Organoids
So far, we focused on inhibitors that caused reduced IEC
diﬀerentiation. However, two probes stood out because they
increased the expression of genes associated with Paneth-,
goblet-, and enteroendocrine cells (Figure 4A). Of these two,
the pan-PARP inhibitor olaparib also had a marked eﬀect
on median organoid size and abundance of LGR5+ stem
cells (Figures 2C–E). The other probe is MS023, which is
an inhibitor of type 1 protein arginine methyltransferases
(PRMTs) such as PRMT1, PRMT3, PRMT4 (CARM1), and
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
7
January 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 618552
Ostrop et al.
Epigenetic Regulation of Intestinal Epithelium
FIGURE 4 | GSK-LSD1 broadly affects IEC composition. (A) Gene expression of organoids treated with DMSO or inhibitors for 96 h, measured by qRT-PCR. Color
scale represents log2 of median of xfold change relative to DMSO-treated organoids of 4 biol. replicates. IEC lineage marker genes are indicated on x-axis. Inhibitor
class is indicated on y-axis. Clustering tree is based on Euclidean distance. Log2 of the Euclidean distance (“perturbation”) is indicated in the right panel, the line at
(Continued)
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
8
January 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 618552
Ostrop et al.
Epigenetic Regulation of Intestinal Epithelium
FIGURE 4 | x = 1.5 indicates inhibitors that were followed up in further experiments. Samples treated with HDAC inhibitors and gene Defa22 were excluded from the
analysis. Euclidean distance including Defa22 is shown in Supplementary Figure 4a. (B) Gene expression of organoids treated with GSK-LSD1 for 96 h measured
by qRT-PCR. xfold change relative to DMSO-treated organoids. 4 biol. replicates, indicated by shape. Median highlighted. (C) Flow cytometry of organoids treated
with DMSO or GSK-LSD1 for 96 h. Gating of representative replicates (left) and normalized frequencies of SSChi_CD24+ and SSClo_CD24hi populations of 5 biol.
replicates, indicated by shape. Mean highlighted. Paired t-test (right). (D) Flow cytometry of small intestinal crypts isolated from Villin-Cre+ Lsd1ﬂ/ﬂ(KO) mice with
intestine-speciﬁc deletion of Lsd1 or wild type (WT) littermates. Gating of representative replicates (left) and frequencies of SSChi_CD24+ and SSClo_CD24hi
populations of 2/2 mice (right). (E) Frequency of DCLK1+ cells measured by intracellular ﬂow cytometry in small intestinal crypts from WT and KO mice. Overlay of
positive cells for secondary anti-rabbit staining, representative replicate (left). Quantiﬁcation of intracellular staining with rabbit anti-DCLK1 primary antibody or control
in small intestinal crypts isolated from WT or KO mice. 3/2 mice. Minimum 7,000 viable cells in parent gate (right). (F) DCLK1+ cells per crypt-villus pair in duodenum
of WT and KO mice. Immunohistochemistry staining of tissue sections. Representative staining (left) and quantiﬁcation in 3/3 mice, mean highlighted. Unpaired t-test
(right).
FIGURE 5 | BET inhibition reduces relative abundance of tuft cells. (A) Gene expression of tuft cell marker genes of organoids treated with DMSO, (+)-JQ1, or
bromosporine for 96 h, measured by qRT-PCR. xfold change relative to DMSO-treated organoids. 4 biol. replicates, indicated by shape. Median highlighted. Paired
t-test. (B) Representative Hpgds-tdTomato tuft cell reporter organoids treated with DMSO, (+)-JQ1, or bromosporine for 8 days with one passage. 10x magniﬁcation,
max. intensity projection. (C) Tuft cell density in Hpgds-tdTomato organoids with DMSO, (+)-JQ1, or bromosporine for 8 days. Each dot represents one organoid.
Unpaired t-test.
PRMT8 (Eram et al., 2016) (Figure 6A). Of note, two other
PRMT inhibitors in our probe library, SGC707 and MS049 that
inhibit PRMT3 and PRMT4/PRMT6, respectively, did not cause
similar eﬀects (Supplementary Figure 6a). Although MS023-
treated organoids were moderately yet signiﬁcantly smaller
than control organoids and Lgr5 gene expression was reduced,
frequency of Lgr5-EGFP stem cells was not signiﬁcantly aﬀected,
and organoids treated for 96 h would renew normally after
splitting (Supplementary Figures 6b–d). The upregulation of
secretory cell marker genes by the inhibitors was reﬂected by
relative cell abundance of the respective lineages in MS023-
treated versus control organoids. SSChi_CD24+ Paneth cells
appeared more frequent in MS023 treated organoids in our
ﬂow cytometry screen (Figure 6B, Supplementary Figure 4c),
and quantiﬁcation of MUC2+ goblet cells showed a trend
in the same direction (Figure 6C). Furthermore, we treated
enteroendocrine cell reporter organoids with MS023 and found
an increased frequency of Neurog3-RFP+ cells compared to the
DMSO control (Figure 6D). To get a more detailed overview of
how MS023 aﬀects organoids, we performed mRNA sequencing
of untreated vs. MS023 treated organoids. We found 462 genes
upregulated and 457 genes downregulated with a log2 fold
change cutoﬀof 0.5 and padjust ≤0.01 (Figure 6E). Importantly,
GSEA of cell-lineage speciﬁc gene sets conﬁrmed that MS023-
treated organoids have a transcriptome that is enriched
for secretory cell lineages (Figure 6F). However, GSEA also
indicated an enrichment for genes associated with enterocytes
(Figure 6F). Thus, rather than speciﬁcally aﬀecting secretory
cells, diﬀerentiation of all IEC cell lineages seems to be increased
in MS023 treated organoids, potentially at the cost of progenitor
cells. This is in agreement with positive enrichment of GO:BP
terms related to nutrient uptake and response to microbials
(Supplementary Figures 6e,f), which are associated with mature
enterocytes and Paneth cells, respectively. DNA repair, which
is a well established function of type I PRMTs (Guccione and
Richard, 2019), was among the negatively correlated GO:BP
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
9
January 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 618552
Ostrop et al.
Epigenetic Regulation of Intestinal Epithelium
FIGURE 6 | Inhibition of type I PRMTs leads to more mature organoids and prevents adenoma growth. (A) Gene expression of organoids treated with MS023 for 96 h
measured by qRT-PCR. xfold change relative to DMSO-treated organoids. 4 biol. replicates, indicated by shape. Median highlighted. (B) Frequency of SSChi_CD24+
Paneth cells in organoids treated with MS023 for 96 h, normalized to DMSO treatment, measured in ﬂow cytometry screen (Supplementary Figure 4c). 3 wells/2
biol. replicates, indicated by shape. Mean highlighted. (C) Density of MUC2+ goblet cells in organoids treated with DMSO or MS023 for 96 h. Median of 3 biol.
replicates, indicated by shape. Each value is the median of 4-11 organoids quantiﬁed. Paired t-test. (D) Frequency of enteroendocrine/enteroendocrine progenitor
Neurog3-RFP+ cells in reporter organoids treated with DMSO or MS023 for 96 h, measured by ﬂow cytometry. Representative gating and quantiﬁcation in 3 biol.
replicates, indicated by shape. Paired t-test. (E) Volcano plot of mRNA sequencing of untreated vs. MS023 treated organoids, 3 biol replicates per group. Selected
genes are highlighted. (F) mRNA sequencing of untreated vs. MS023 treated organoids. GSEA for Paneth cell, goblet cell, enteroendocrine cell, and tuft cell signatures
from Haber et al. (2017) (GSE92332). Normalized enrichment scores (NES) and false discovery rates (FDR) are indicated. (G) Apc-deﬁcient adenomas treated with
DMSO, MS023, or TC-E5003 for 96 h. Representative well (top, full well shown in Supplementary Figure 6j, scale bar shows 500 µm) and quantiﬁcation of organoid
size and mean gray value, 7 individual wells per condition (bottom). (H) Organoids treated with DMSO, MS023, or TC-E5003 for 96 h. Representative replicate (top, full
well-shown in Supplementary Figure 6k, scale bar shows 500 µm) and quantiﬁcation of organoid size and mean gray value, 3 biol. replicates per condition (bottom).
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
10
January 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 618552
Ostrop et al.
Epigenetic Regulation of Intestinal Epithelium
terms (Supplementary Figures 6e,g). We found that PRMT1
was the type I PRMT with the highest gene expression level in
SI crypts and organoids (Supplementary Figure 6h). Enhanced
PRMT levels are found in various malignancies and high
PRMT1 expression is negatively correlated with survival in colon
cancer (Mathioudaki et al., 2008; Jarrold and Davies, 2019).
Furthermore, Prmt1 gene expression was highest in ISC, transit-
amplifying cells, and early enterocyte progenitors compared
to fully diﬀerentiated lineages in a published IEC scRNA-seq
dataset (Haber et al., 2017) (Supplementary Figure 6i). We
therefore hypothesize that inhibition of type I PRMTs leads
to maturation of IECs, which aligns with the observation
that diﬀerentiated cells have lower Prmt1 levels. To test if
PRMT type I inhibition could hence be used therapeutically
to force progenitors, such as those found in WNT-driven
tumors, to mature or diﬀerentiate, we treated Apc-deﬁcient
organoids with MS023 or the PRMT1-speciﬁc inhibitor TC-
E5003. MS023 treated adenomas were smaller and darker
than adenomas treated with DMSO control, and TC-E5003
treatment almost completely hindered their growth (Figure 6G,
Supplementary Figure 6j). Yet, these probes did not cause
growth inhibition of wild type organoids nor did they
reduce cell viability (Figure 6H, Supplementary Figures 6k,l).
In summary, we show that inhibition of type I PRMT leads
to more diﬀerentiated organoids and has the potential to
hinder proliferation in intestinal tumor organoids, making it an
attractive candidate to pursue in future studies.
DISCUSSION
Working with heterogeneous organoid cultures is challenging
with respect to reproducibility and quantiﬁcation. Our toolkit,
which we present in this article enables reproducible results
across biological replicates using standard equipment and is
suitable for screening setups. We established a quantiﬁcation
workﬂow that is based on the open source tools ImageJ and
Ilastik, which is a simple yet robust alternative to recent stand-
alone software options (Borten et al., 2018; Kassis et al., 2019) and
could easily be adapted to diﬀerent tissue organoids. In addition,
qRT-PCR and ﬂow cytometry of IEC lineages is suﬃciently
sensitive for initial screening and was subsequently conﬁrmed
by additional methods such as reporter organoids. We used this
screening setup to test a set of 39 chemical probes targeting
epigenetic modiﬁers and identiﬁed probes that strongly aﬀected
organoid size or IEC lineage composition. These new regulators
of intestinal epithelial biology are highly interesting candidates
for further mechanistic studies.
Probes targeting EP300/CREBBP were designed as cancer
therapeutics (Attar and Kurdistani, 2017). Thus, we were
surprised to ﬁnd that inhibition of P300/CREBBP led to
an increase of organoid size, which was supported by an
expansion of LGR5+ cells and reduction of diﬀerentiation
(Figure 3). EP300/CREBBP mediate acetylation of histone
H3K27 at enhancer elements and promoters, and can act as a
transcriptional co-activator with numerous transcription factors
(Goodman and Smolik, 2000; Ramos et al., 2010; Wang et al.,
2013; Raisner et al., 2018; Weinert et al., 2018). In support of a
general activating role for EP300/CREBBP, we found that the
majority of genes altered by I-CBP112-treatment were down-
regulated (Figure 3D), and many of these genes are established
targets
of
EP300/CREBBP-associated
transcription
factors.
EP300/CREBBP is a well established co-activator of signaling
cascades that control cell proliferation, including WNT, NFκB,
or MYB signaling. Although we cannot rule out that altering
these interactions might contribute to enhanced organoid
growth, transcriptional signatures associated with β-Catenin
(Ctnnb1), NFκB-subunit RelA, or MYB were downregulated
after treatment with the EP300/CREBBP inhibitor I-CBP112
(Supplementary Figure 3h). It is diﬃcult to separate the
epigenetic modiﬁer (H3K27 acetylation) from the transcriptional
co-activator role of EP300/CREBBP, especially since a recent
study showed a central role for the bromodomain and HAT
domain also for the EP300/CREBBP transcription factor binding
capacity (Ortega et al., 2018). Nevertheless, underlining the
critical role of the bromodomain, plt6-mice that carry a mutation
in the EP300KIX domain, which speciﬁcally prevents interaction
of EP300 with the transcription factor MYB, displayed reduced
cell proliferation in the intestine (Sampurno et al., 2013). The
EP300/CREBBP bromodomain is critically required for H3K27
acetylation at enhancer elements, a mark of active enhancers, and
its inhibition leads to reduced expression of enhancer-proximal
genes (Creyghton et al., 2010; Raisner et al., 2018). In the adult
small intestine, Sheaﬀer et al. (2014) described a gain of H3K27Ac
at dynamically methylated enhancer sites in diﬀerentiated IECs
but not LGR5+ ISC. Furthermore, Kazakevych et al. (2017)
found that H3K27Ac positive distal elements were a good
indicator for cell identity and diﬀerentiation status whereas
genes positively regulating proliferation were transcribed in
most IEC types. EP300/CREBBP has previously been shown
to be required for diﬀerentiation of embryonic stem cells,
muscle cells, and adipocytes (Puri et al., 1997; Zhong and Jin,
2009; Namwanje et al., 2019). In turn, Ebrahimi et al. (2019)
recently described that EP300/CREBBP maintains transcription
of ﬁbroblast-speciﬁc somatic genes and that EP300/CREBBP
bromodomain inhibition can promote cellular reprogramming
to pluripotency, accompanied by decrease in promoter- and
enhancer-associated H3K27 acetylation. We provide evidence
that EP300/CREBBP inhibition in the intestinal epithelium
can promote proliferation rather than preventing it. It appears
plausible that EP300/CREBBP bromodomain activity is critically
required to enable transcription of IEC diﬀerentiation genes and
that in its absence the intestinal epithelium remains immature,
accompanied by an enhanced proliferative capacity.
We recently demonstrated a central role of LSD1 in Paneth
and goblet cell diﬀerentiation and maturation (Parmar et al.,
2020; Zwiggelaar et al., 2020). Here, we conﬁrm the critical
role of LSD1 for IEC lineage diﬀerentiation in an unbiased
screen and in addition provide indications that instead of
Paneth/goblet cells there is an expansion of DCLK1+ tuft
cells that is associated with a CD24high_SSClow population by
ﬂow cytometry (Figure 4). In contrast, we ﬁnd that treatment
with the BRD/BET inhibitors (+)JQ-1 and bromosporine
completely blocks tuft cell diﬀerentiation (Figure 5). Tuft cells
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
11
January 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 618552
Ostrop et al.
Epigenetic Regulation of Intestinal Epithelium
are important mediators of intestinal type 2 immunity (Gerbe
et al., 2016; von Moltke et al., 2016). Our work matches
observations of two studies that found that inhibition of the
BET bromodomain in vivo abolished tuft cells (Bolden et al.,
2014; Nakagawa et al., 2016). Using a diﬀerent BRD/BET probe,
Nakagawa et al. (2016) described that the absence of tuft
cells was due to blockade of transit-amplifying cells as their
intermediate progenitors. While Nakagawa et al. also found a
reduction of enteroendocrine cells, another study described an
increase of pancreatic NEUROG3+ enteroendocrine progenitors
following (+)-JQ1 treatment (Huijbregts et al., 2019). Our
ﬁndings could be the foundation of using these compounds to
modulate immune responses, especially when a type 2 response
is unfavorable.
Type I PRMT inhibition with MS023 led to a more
diﬀerentiated intestinal epithelium without major loss of LGR5+
stem cells (Figure 6, Supplementary Figure 6c). PRMT1 was the
most highly expressed type I PRMT and is higher expressed
in ISCs and progenitors compared to diﬀerentiated cells
(Supplementary Figures 6h,i). An evolutionary conserved role
of PRMT1 in the adult intestine has been proposed earlier
as endogenous PRMT1 knockdown reduces the adult ISC
population in Xenopus and zebraﬁsh, while transgenic PRMT1
overexpression leads to an increase of ISCs (Matsuda and Shi,
2010; Ishizuya-Oka and Shi, 2011). Furthermore, our observation
is very similar to ﬁndings of enriched PRMT1 in epidermis
progenitors, required for maintenance of this population (Bao
et al., 2017). Bao et al. (2017) proposed that PRMT1 is both
involved in the maintenance of progenitor/proliferative genes as
well as the repression of “diﬀerentiation” genes. In agreement
with the latter, we found increase of all diﬀerentiated IEC lineages
after treatment with MS023 (Figures 6A–F). PRMT1 has a wide
substrate speciﬁcity and mediates both arginine methylation of
histones such as H4R3, and non-histone proteins (Huang et al.,
2005; Lehman et al., 2020). Elevated PRMT1 expression is found
in several cancer types and is associated with poor prognosis
and chemoinsensitivity (Altan et al., 2016; Musiani et al., 2020)
and pharmacological PRMT inhibitors have recently gained
interest as drug candidates for cancer treatment (Guccione and
Richard, 2019; Jarrold and Davies, 2019). Targeting cancer stem
cells (CSCs) in the gut comes with the challenge that following
ablation of LGR5+ CSCs, LGR5- cells have the potential to de-
diﬀerentiate to CSCs (Morgan et al., 2018). Therefore, forcing
diﬀerentiation of cancer cells could be an attractive treatment
strategy. Indeed, we found that PRMT type I inhibition with
MS023 and PRMT1-speciﬁc inhibition with TC-E5003 severely
impaired growth of Apc-deﬁcient tumor organoids but not
normal organoids (Figures 6G,H). A conditional Prmt1-deﬁcient
mouse was recently generated (Choi et al., 2019). Crossing
these mice with intestine-speciﬁc Villin-Cre or tumor-developing
Apcmin mice, could be an elegant way to further study the role of
PRMT1 in IEC diﬀerentiation and maturation and to investigate
the therapeutic potential of PRMT1 inhibition for the treatment
of intestinal cancer.
Highly permissive chromatin and transcriptional control of
IEC fate, as well as gene regulation by diﬀerential chromatin
states, have been discussed as opposing models of intestinal
epithelial diﬀerentiation regulation (Elliott and Kaestner, 2015).
Testing a library of highly selective inhibitors targeting more
than 20 epigenetic modiﬁcation enzymes/enzyme families, only
two HDAC-inhibitors prevented organoid growth (Figure 2)
and the majority of the tested probes did not alter organoid
growth or IEC composition. However, we found that few
compounds resulted in pronounced changes and these were
associated with generally less (EP300/CREBBP, LSD1 inhibition)
or more (PRMT type I inhibition) epithelial diﬀerentiation. We
therefore propose that epigenetic modiﬁers control the degree
of intestinal epithelial diﬀerentiation in general, rather than
aﬀecting speciﬁc cell lineage fate. Whether this parallels the
postnatal maturation of the fetal intestinal epithelium remains
to be elucidated. Of note, the epigenetic modiﬁers identiﬁed to
aﬀect IEC diﬀerentiation in our screen share the capacity to
both modify histones and to interact with multiple transcription
factors. Thus, these molecules could be a key link connecting the
epigenetic and the transcriptional layers of gene regulation in the
intestinal epithelium. Indeed, work by others supports a model
of tightly intertwined epigenetic and transcriptional control and
shifting between permissive and dynamic chromatin on a local
instead of a global scale. By integrating the investigation of
gene expression, open chromatin, and DNA hydroxymethylation
in IEC populations with diﬀerential expression levels of the
transcription factor SOX9, recent elegant work by Raab et al.
(2020) identiﬁed either highly permissive or dynamic chromatin
states at given loci relative to transcription factor binding. EP300
has been described to potentiate SOX9-dependent transcription
(Furumatsu et al., 2005) and Sox9-deﬁcient intestinal epithelium
fails to mature (Bastide et al., 2007). Mapping of EP300-binding
sites was recently utilized to identify transcriptional networks in
specialized cell types in the placenta (Lee et al., 2019), inspiring
further investigation of epigenetic modiﬁer-aided transcription
in diﬀerent IEC lineages.
To summarize, we developed a resource that allows to
compare the requirement of various epigenetic modiﬁers
for intestinal epithelial renewal and IEC diﬀerentiation. Our
results indicate that some epigenetic modiﬁers with the
capacity to both mediate histone modiﬁcations and act as
transcriptional co-regulators control the balance between an
undiﬀerentiated/diﬀerentiated epithelial state. Thereby, they lay
basis for a ﬁne-tuned transcriptional regulation and rapid
adjustment upon injury or pathogenic challenge.
METHODS
Epigenetic Modiﬁer Inhibitors
The epigenetic modiﬁer inhibitors in the screen experiment
were part of the Structural Genomics Consortium Epigenetic
Chemical Probes Collection as of March 2016. Probes were
reconstituted
in
DMSO
and
used
at
the
recommended
concentration as listed in Supplementary Table 1. 1 mM
valproic acid (VPA) was included as positive control. DMSO
vehicle control was matched to the highest concentration used
per experiment, maximal 10 µM. PRMT1-speciﬁc inhibitor
TC-E5003 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, # sc397056) was included
in follow-up experiments and used at 50 µM, equivalent to 10
µM DMSO.
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
12
January 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 618552
Ostrop et al.
Epigenetic Regulation of Intestinal Epithelium
Mice
C57BL/6JRj wild type (Janvier labs), Lgr5-EGFP-IRES-CreERT2
(Jackson Laboratories, stock no: 008875), Villin-Cre (el Marjou
et al., 2004) (kind gift from Sylvie Robine), Lsd1f/f (Kerenyi
et al., 2013) (kind gift from Stuart Orkin), and Apc15lox
(Jackson Laboratories, stock no: 029275) mice were housed
under speciﬁc-pathogen free conditions at the Comparative
Medicine Core Facility (CoMed), Norwegian University of
Science and Technology, Norway. For the ﬂow cytometry
screening experiment, organoids were generated from C57BL/6
mice housed at the Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare
Pharmakologie, Germany. Hpgds-tdTomato mice (Bornstein
et al., 2018) were housed at University of Montpellier, France.
Neurog3-RFP mice (Kim et al., 2015) (kind gift from Anne
Grapin-Botton) were housed at University of Copenhagen,
Denmark. Experiments were performed following the respective
legislation on animal protection, were approved by the local
governmental animal care committee, and were in accordance
with the European Convention for the Protection of Vertebrate
Animals used for Experimental and other Scientiﬁc purposes.
Small Intestinal Crypt Isolation
Small intestinal crypts were isolated as described previously (Sato
and Clevers, 2012). The proximal half of the small intestine was
rinsed, opened longitudinally, cut to small pieces after villi and
mucus were scraped oﬀ, washed with PBS until the solution was
clear, and incubated in 2 mM EDTA/PBS for 30 min at 4◦C with
gentle rocking. Fragments were subsequently washed with PBS
and the crypt fraction was typically collected from wash 2–5. All
centrifugation steps were carried out at 300 × g.
Organoid Culture
Organoids were generated by seeding ca. 250–500 small intestinal
crypts in a 50 µl droplet of cold Matrigel (Corning #734-1101)
into the middle of a pre-warmed 24-well plate. Matrigel was
solidiﬁed by incubation at 37◦C for 5–15 min and 500 µl culture
medium added. Basal culture medium (“ENR”) consisted of
advanced DMEM F12 (Gibco) supplemented with 1x Penicillin-
Streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich), 10 mM HEPES, 2 mM Glutamax,
1x B-27 supplement, 1x N2 supplement, (all Gibco) 500 mM
N-Acetylcysteine (Sigma-Aldrich), 50 ng/ml recombinant EGF
(Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc), 10% conditioned medium from a
cell line producing Noggin (kind gift from Hans Clevers),
and 20% conditioned medium from a cell line producing R-
Spondin-1 (kind gift from Calvin Kuo). ENR culture medium
was replaced every 2–3 days. Organoids were passaged at 1:3–1:4
ratio by disruption with rigorous pipetting almost to single cells.
Organoid fragments were centrifuged at 300 × g, resuspended in
40–50 µl cold Matrigel per well, and plated on pre-warmed 24-
well plates. Organoids derived from diﬀerent mice or a repetition
at least one passage apart are considered biological replicates.
Technical replicates, i.e., separate wells, were carried out in some
experiments and were pooled for analysis.
Altering IEC Lineage Composition in
Organoids
Protocols to alter the IEC composition in organoids have been
described previously (Yin et al., 2014; Kishida et al., 2017; Luu
et al., 2018). Organoids were grown for 48 h in ENR or ENR
+ 3 µM CHIR99021 (Sigma-Aldrich) and 1 mM valproic acid
(VPA). Then, media was replaced by ENR, ENR + 3 µM CHIR
and 1 mM VPA, ENR + 3 µM CHIR and 10 µM DAPT, or
ENR + 10 µM DAPT and 2 µM IWP2. VPA, DAPT, IWP2 were
purchased from Cayman Chemicals. Organoids were harvested
72 h after media change.
Organoid Screen With Epigenetic Chemical
Probes Library
Organoids of four biological replicates were passaged to nearly
single cells at 1:4 ratio as described above and seeded in 40 µl
Matrigel droplets in 24-well plates. 250 µl/well ENR were added
immediately after solidiﬁcation and 250 µl/well ENR + probes
at 2x working concentration (see Supplementary Table 1) were
added within 30 min. For each biological replicate DMSO vehicle
controls were carried out in quadruplicates. Media was replaced
after 48 h. Organoids bright-ﬁeld images were acquired daily on
an EVOS2 microscope and after 96 h RNA was harvested.
Reporter Organoids
Lgr5-EGFP organoids were generated as described above from
Lgr5-EGFP-IRES-CreERT2 mice and maintained for no longer
than 3 weeks. Organoids were grown in ENR or ENR +
3µM CHIR99021 (Sigma-Aldrich) as indicated and Lgr5-
EGFP+ cells were quantiﬁed using a BD LSRII ﬂow cytometer
(Becton Dickinson) as percentage of viable cells. Tuft cell
reporter organoids were generated from Hpgds-tdTomato mice
(expressing tdTomato under the Hpgds promoter) as described
above. Hpgds-tdTomato+ cells were quantiﬁed by confocal
microscopy on an Axio Imager Z1 microscope (Zeiss) as number
of cells relative to the organoid area after z-stack projection,
determined by nuclear staining. Enteroendocrine cell reporter
organoids were derived from the proximal small intestine
of Neurog3-RFP mice (expressing RFP under the Neurog3
promoter) and cultured as described above using recombinant
murine Noggin (100 ng/ml, Peprotech) and 10% R-Spondin
conditioned medium. Neurog3-RFP+ cells were quantiﬁed using
a BD FACSAria III ﬂow cytometer (Becton Dickinson) as
percentage of viable cells.
Modiﬁed Organoid Growth Conditions With
EP300/CREBBP Inhibition
Lgr5-EGFP organoids were grown in ENR or ENR + 3 µM CHIR
for 96 h. Media was replaced after 48 h. To investigate low growth
factor conditions, wild type organoids were grown in ENR or
ENR with 1% R-Spondin, ENR with 5 ng/ml EGF, or ENR + 2
µM IWP2 for 192 h. Media was replaced every 48 h.
Splitting of Organoids After Type I PRMT
Inhibition
Organoids were treated with DMSO or MS023 for 96 h, passaged
to nearly single cells as described above, and cultured in ENR for
additional 96 h. Media was replaced every 48 h.
Generation of APC-Deﬁcient Adenomas
Eight week old Apc15lox × Lgr5-EGFP-IRES-CreERT2 mice were
administered 2 mg Tamoxifen in corn oil (both Sigma-Aldrich)
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
13
January 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 618552
Ostrop et al.
Epigenetic Regulation of Intestinal Epithelium
for 5 consecutive days. Adenomatous polyps developed over
the course of a month (ethically approved by the Norwegian
Food Safety Authority, FOTS ID: 15888). To generate adenoma
organoids, the small intestine was rinsed with PBS, opened
longitudinally, polyps were excised, cut into small pieces, and
washed in PBS. Next, 5 ml TrypLE express (Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc) was added and incubated for 30 min at 37◦C while
pipetting every 5–10 min. After incubation, single cells were
obtained by passing the supernatant through a 40 µm strainer.
Single cells were plated in 50 µl cold Matrigel on a pre-warmed
24-well plate, and cultured in basal culture medium lacking
R-Spondin-1 (“EN”). EN culture medium was replaced every
2–3 days.
Organoid Growth Quantiﬁcation
Organoid bright-ﬁeld images were acquired on an EVOS2
microscope (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) with 2x magniﬁcation. At
the starting point of the experiment, for each plate an automation
setup was generated to acquire z-stacks with 50 µm spacing
either of a single position or 2–4 tiled images covering height and
most area of the Matrigel dome for each well. This automation
setup was reused at consecutive timepoints. A custom ImageJ/Fiji
v1.52n (Schindelin et al., 2012, 2015) macro was used to
collect single positions and layers for each well, to save a stack
(ImageJ bright-ﬁeld stack) and projections, and to perform a
simple organoid segmentation (“ImageJ workﬂow”). For the
segmentation, a Sobel edge detector was applied to each z-stack
layer (ImageJ edge stack), a standard deviation z-projection of
the edge stack was generated, and particle analysis with optional
manual correction was performed after several binary operations
and thresholding. For an improved segmentation that is robust to
stitching artifacts, allows to ﬁlter out debris and organoid clusters
and to distinguish diﬀerent organoid phenotypes, the ImageJ
workﬂow was combined with the interactive machine learning
software Ilastik v1.3.2 (Berg et al., 2019) (“combined workﬂow”).
Training data was taken from the analyzed experiment and
excluded from further analysis. In a ﬁrst step, pixel classiﬁcation
on an intensity summary projection of the ImageJ edge stack
was used to separate between background and object outlines.
The generated pixel prediction maps were then used as input
in a second step of object classiﬁcation together with minimum
projections of the ImageJ bright-ﬁeld stack. Routinely, the
following label classes were used: Organoid, big sphere, small
sphere, cluster, debris, background mislabeled as organoid, air
bubble, edges of well plate. Objects classiﬁed in the latter three
object classes were excluded from all timepoints, objects classiﬁed
as debris or cluster were excluded from 72 to 96 h timepoints.
Representative images were arranged using GNU R packages
magick and ggimage.
RNA Isolation, Quantitative RT-PCR, and
Analysis
To harvest RNA, organoids in the Matrigel dome were dissolved
in 250 µl RNA-solv reagent (Omega Bio-Tek). RNA was
isolated using Direct-zol-96 RNA or Direct-zol MiniPrep kit
(Zymo Research) according to the manufacturer’s instructions,
including DNAse digestion. cDNA was transcribed using High-
Capacity RNA-to-cDNA Kit (Applied Biosystems) according to
the manufacturer’s instructions. RNA quality and concentration
was assessed on an NanoDrop-1000 instrument (NanoDrop).
Samples were handled in 96-well plates and transferred with
multichannel pipettes. qRT-PCR was carried out in technical
duplicates in 384-well plates on a QuantStudio 5 instrument
(Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) using 2x Perfecta ROX,UNG Fast
Mix (Quanta Biosciences) and 5 ng cDNA per reaction in a
total volume of 12 µl. Primer-probe combinations were selected
based on the Universal Probe Library System (Roche) and
are listed in Supplementary Table 2, primers were purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich. Hprt was used as housekeeping gene.
1CT values were calculated as 1CT = CT (housekeeping
gene)-CT (gene of interest) (such that higher values indicate
higher relative expression); 11CT values referred to the
calibrator as indicated, and fold change was calculated as
211CT. Target gene “perturbation” was calculated as Euclidean
distance of the log2 median fold change using GNU R
package pheatmap. Defa22 gene expression was below the
detection limit for some samples and was therefore omitted
from the Euclidean distance ranking but is provided in the
Supplementary Material.
Flow Cytometry
To obtain single cells, Matrigel in 1–3 wells was disrupted
by pipetting, well content was transferred to an Eppendorf
tube, centrifuged at 300× g, and supernatant removed. Then,
organoids were incubated with 300 µl TrypLE express (Thermo
Fisher Scientiﬁc) for 37◦C for 30 min and pipetted up/down with
a 1,000 µl pipet tip prior to and after the incubation. Single
cells were stained with Zombie Aqua (Biolegend, 1:1,000 in PBS)
for 15 min at room temperature (RT) for live-dead exclusion. If
DAPI instead of Zombie Aqua staining was used for live-dead
exclusion, it was added it during the last washing step (1:1,000).
Samples were incubated with antibody conjugates against
CD326-BV605, CD24-PerCp-Cy5.5 or AF647, CD44-BV785,
CD117-PE-Cy7 [all Biolegend, see Supplementary Table 3 for
detailed list, 1:200 in PBS + 2% fetal calf serum (FCS)],
and Ulex Europaeus Agglutinin (UEA)1-Rhodamine (2 µg/ml,
Vector Laboratories #RL-1062-2) for 20 min at 4◦C. For
intracellular staining, samples were subsequently ﬁxed with 2%
paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 15min, and incubated with or
without rabbit anti-DCLK1 (Abcam #ab31704, 1:500 in PBS/2%
FCS/0.05% Saponin) for 1 h at 4◦C, followed by incubation
with Goat anti-Rabbit IgG-AF405 (Invitrogen, 1:1,000 in PBS
+ 2% FCS + 0.05% Saponin). Samples were analyzed on a
BD LSRII instrument (Becton Dickinson) equipped with 405,
488, 561, 647 nm laser lines. Single ﬂuorochrome stainings
of cells and compensation particles (BD CompBead, Becton
Dickinson) were included in each experiment. For analysis,
FlowJo software v10.6.2 and GNU R/Bioconductor v3.6.3/v3.10
packages ﬂowCore, CytoML/ﬂowWorkspace, ggcyto, ﬂowViz
were used (Van et al., 2018). If not indicated otherwise, only
samples with more than 10,000 viable cells in the parent gate
were included.
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
14
January 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 618552
Ostrop et al.
Epigenetic Regulation of Intestinal Epithelium
Flow Cytometry Screening
For the ﬂow cytometry screening experiment, organoids were
grown in 96 well glass-bottom plates (Cellvis) that were pre-
cooled and held on ice during seeding. Organoid fragments
in Matrigel (50 µl/well) were distributed in pre-cooled plates
with an automated pipette, then plates were transferred to a
rotary plate shaker for 30 s at 150 rpm, before the Matrigel
was solidiﬁed at 37◦C. With help of a Viaﬂo 96-channel pipette
(Integra Biosciences) 200 µl/well ENR without or with inhibitors
were added of which 100 µl were replaced daily during the 96 h
time course. To obtain single cells, culture media was removed,
100 µl/well TrypLE express (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) added
and Matrigel disrupted by repeated pipetting with a multichannel
pipette. Staining with Zombie Aqua, CD326-BV421, CD24
-PerCp-Cy5.5, CD44-AF647, CD117-PE-Cy7 (all Biolegend,
see Supplementary Table 3 for detailed list), and UEA1-FITC
(Invitrogen) was carried out as described above. Samples were
run on a MACSQuant X instrument (Miltenyi Biotec) equipped
with 405, 488, 647 nm laser lines and analyzed as described
above. Euclidean distance clustering tree of normalized median
population frequencies was generated with GNU R package
ggtree (Yu et al., 2018).
Confocal Microscopy and Quantiﬁcation
For immunoﬂuorescence staining, organoids were grown in 30
µl/well Matrigel droplets in a 8-well microscopy chamber (Ibidi)
that was pre-warmed for seeding. After 96 h incubation, the
organoids were ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde and 2% sucrose
for 30 min at RT, washed, and permeabilized with 0.2% Triton-
X100 in PBS. Free aldehyde groups were blocked using 100 mM
glycine, followed by blocking buﬀer (1% BSA, 2% NGS diluted
in 0.2% Triton-X100 in PBS) for 1 h at RT. The organoids were
incubated overnight at 4◦C with a primary antibody against
KI67 (Invitrogen #MA5-14520; 1:200) or MUC2 (Santa Cruz #sc-
15334; 1:200) in blocking buﬀer, followed by three washes with
slight agitation. Next, the organoids were incubated with Goat
anti-Rabbit IgG-AF488 (Invitrogen, 1:500), UEA1-Rhodamine
(Vector Laboratories #RL-1062-2, 2 µg/ml), and Hoechst 33342
overnight at 4◦C. After washing, the organoids were mounted
using Fluoromount G (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc), and visualized
using a LSM880 confocal microscope (Zeiss). UEA1/MUC2-
positive cells were manually counted for ≥5 organoids per
biological replicate in a middle plane of a z-stack. Cell numbers
are reported relative to the area of the z-stack projection of each
organoid, determined by nuclear staining.
Immunohistochemistry and
Immunoﬂuorescence Staining of
Parafﬁn-Embedded Tissue and
Quantiﬁcation
Immediately after euthanizing mice, the intestinal tissues were
removed, washed with PBS, ﬁxed in 4% formaldehyde for 48–
72 h at RT, and embedded in paraﬃn wax. Staining was carried
out on 4 µm paraﬃn sections. The sections were rehydrated and
treated with 3% hydrogen peroxide for 10 min at RT. Antigens
were retrieved by boiling the slides in citrate buﬀer (pH6) in
a microwave for 15 min. For immunohistochemistry staining
of duodenum sections, the sections were incubated overnight
at 4◦C with anti-DCLK1 (Abcam #ab31704; 1:1,500) in TBS
+ 0.025% Tween 20 + 1% BSA. Speciﬁc binding was detected
with Envision-HRP (Dako) and DAB (Dako) and images were
acquired on a EVOS2 microscope (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) with
10x magniﬁcation. DCLK1+ cells were quantiﬁed for ≥30 crypt-
villus pairs per mouse. Representative images were acquired
on a Eclipse Ci-L microscope (Nikon) with 20x magniﬁcation.
For immunoﬂuorescence staining of colon sections, slides were
blocked with PBS + 1% BSA + 2% goat serum + 0.2% Triton
X-100 for 1h at RT and incubated overnight at 4◦C with anti-
DCLK1 antibody (Abcam #ab31704; 1:250) in PBS + 1% BSA
+1% goat serum + 0.05% Tween 20. Speciﬁc binding was detected
with Goat anti-Rabbit IgG-AF488 (Invitrogen, 1:1,000) for 1h at
37◦C while nuclei were stained with DAPI (1:1,000). Slides were
mounted with Fluoromount G (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) and
images were acquired on a LSM880 confocal microscope (Zeiss)
with 20x magniﬁcation. DCLK1+ cells were quantiﬁed for ≥50
crypts per mouse.
mRNA Sequencing
Organoid RNA was isolated and treated with DNAse with
Quick-RNA Micro prep kit (Zymo Research) according to
manufacturer’s instructions. RNA integrity numbers were found
to be ≥7. For the I-CBP112 inhibitor study, library preparation
was done using the Illumina TruSeq Stranded protocol. Library
concentrations were quantiﬁed with the Qubit Fluorometric
Quantitation system (Life Technologies) and the size distribution
was assessed using a 2100 Bioanalyzer automated electrophoresis
system (Agilent). For sequencing, samples were diluted and
pooled into NGS libraries in equimolar amounts and sequenced
at 75 bp single-read chemistry on an Illumina NS500 MO ﬂow-
cell on a Ilumina NextSeq 500 instrument (Illumina) by the
Genomics core facility (GCF, NTNU). For the MS023 study,
library preparation was done using the NEB Next Ultra RNA
Library Prep Kit with poly(A) mRNA enrichment and samples
were sequenced at 150X2 bp paired-end chemistry on a Illumina
NovaSeq 6000 instrument by Novogene (UK) Co.
mRNA Sequencing Analysis
Read quality was assessed using FastQC v0.11.8, reads were
aligned with STAR v2.7.3a to the Mus musculus genome build
mm10, and MultiQC v1.7 was used to summarize logs from
STAR and FastQC (Dobin et al., 2013; Leggett et al., 2013; Ewels
et al., 2016). The number of reads that uniquely aligned to
the exon region of each gene in GENCODE annotation M18
of the mouse genome was then counted using featureCounts
v1.6.4 (Liao et al., 2014; Frankish et al., 2019). Genes that
had a total count <10 were ﬁltered out. Diﬀerential expression
was then determined with GNU R/Bioconductor v3.6.1/v3.10
package DESeq2 v1.26.0 using default settings and shrunken
log2foldchange was calculated with the apeglm method (Love
et al., 2014; Zhu et al., 2019). GSEA enrichment was performed
using GNU R/Bioconductor v3.6.3/v3.10 package ClusterProﬁler
v3.14.3 by shrunken log2 fold change and with the shrunken
log2 fold change as weights using 10,000 permutations (Yu
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
15
January 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 618552
Ostrop et al.
Epigenetic Regulation of Intestinal Epithelium
et al., 2012). Gensets for celltype signatures were assembled
based on single-cell and bulk RNA-Sequencing data from sorted
samples based on datasets by Haber et al. (2017) (GSE92332)
and Muñoz et al. (2012) (GSE33949). Transcription factors
interacting with murine or human EP300 or CREBBP were
retrieved from protein-protein interactions with an minimum
medium experimental conﬁdence level (≥0.4) from STRING-DB
v11 (Szklarczyk et al., 2019). Genesets regulated for the mouse
and human version of these transcription factors were retrieved
from TRRUST v2 (Han et al., 2018). For human genesets,
murine orthologue genes retrieved from Ensembl GRCh38.p13
through GNU R/Bioconductor v3.6.3/v3.10 package biomaRt
v2.42.1 (Durinck et al., 2005) were used for enrichment. Genesets
for characterization of Biological Process were directly obtained
from The Gene Ontology Consortium (2019).
Data Processing and Statistical Analysis
Data was processed and statistical analysis was carried out
with GNU R v3.6.3 using the packages tidyverse and ggpubr
(Wickham et al., 2019). Pearson correlation coeﬃcient, and
paired or unpaired t-test were calculated as indicated, assuming
normal distribution. Median or mean are shown as indicated. In
boxplots, the box represent the 25, 50, and 75% percentiles and
whiskers represent 1.5 × IQR.
CODE AVAILABILITY
The ImageJ script used for organoid segmentation is available
at:
https://github.com/jennyostrop/Fiji_organoid_brightﬁeld_
processing and deposited under https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
3951126.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The Imaging data from the initial screen was deposited to
the Image Data Resource (Williams et al., 2017; https://idr.
openmicroscopy.org) under accession number idr0092. The
Ilastik projects and respective training data of the initial screen
organoid segmentation were deposited to Zenodo under https://
doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4311473. The qRT-PCR data from the
initial screen was deposited along with processed data from
follow-up experiments to BioStudies database at EMBL-EBI
(Sarkans et al., 2018; https://www.ebi.ac.uk/biostudies) under
accession number S-BSST447. RNA-seq data were deposited in
the ArrayExpress database at EMBL-EBI (Athar et al., 2019;
https://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress) under accession number E-
MTAB-9290 (I-CBP112-treated samples) and E-MTAB-9291
(MS023-treated samples).
ETHICS STATEMENT
The animal study was reviewed and approved by the Norwegian
Food Safety Authority (FOTS ID: 15888).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
JO and MO designed the study. JO, RZ, MT, FG, HL,
AD-S, NP, SR, and MO performed the experiments. JO, RZ,
MT, FG, KB, and HL analyzed the data. JO, KB, and HL
curated the data. CA provided critical materials. PJ, KJ, CA,
and MO supervised or provided critical insight. JO, RZ, and
MO wrote the manuscript with subsequent input from other
authors. All authors contributed to the article and approved the
submitted version.
FUNDING
This work was provided by the Norwegian Research Council
(Young
Research
Talent
274760 to
MO
and
Centre
of
Excellence grant 223255/F50) and the Norwegian Cancer Society
(182767 to MO). The ﬂow cytometry screen was carried out
at Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie
(FMP) Screening Unit, Berlin, Germany with funding from
H2020 CORBEL (PID6031 to JO). ELIXIR Norway and the
Centre for Digital Life Norway, funded by the Norwegian
Research Council (270068 and 248810/O70) assisted with data
management.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the imaging (CMIC), animal care (CoMed), and
genomics core (GCF) facilities at NTNU for assistance in this
work. We thank Dr. Sneha Pinto for critical reading of the
manuscript. This manuscript has been released as a pre-print at
BioRxiv (Ostrop et al., 2020).
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fcell.2020.
618552/full#supplementary-material
Supplementary Figure 1 | (a) Organoid growth 24-96h, representative well from
experiment quantiﬁed in Figure 1C. The area shown in Figure 1A is marked. (b)
Organoid segmentation with ImageJ/Fiji (“IJ,” left) and combined ImageJ/Fiji and
Ilastik (“Ilastik,” right) workﬂow, 48 and 96 h timepoints. The ImageJ segmentation
sufﬁciently identiﬁes objects while the combined workﬂow is more accurate and
can distinguish phenotypes such as organoid, sphere, cluster, or debris. (c)
Quantiﬁcation result with ImageJ workﬂow. Pooled data from 2 biol. replicates. (d)
Flow cytometry gating strategy. (e) Flow cytometry of organoids grown for 48 and
96 h. Population frequencies of ﬂow cytometry staining in Cells, Cells/CD326hi and
Cells/CD24+ parent gate, 3 biol. replicates, indicated by shape, mean highlighted
(bottom). Log2 fold change normalized to 96 h timepoint, visualized as dot plot,
dot size corresponds to absolute log2 fold change (top). (f) Flow cytometry of
organoids cultured for 48 h followed by 72 h (48_72 h) with normal culture
medium (ENR_ENR), or culture medium containing CHIR+VPA_CHIR+VPA,
CHIR+VPA_CHIR+DAPT, or CHIR+VPA_IWP2+DAPT to modify IEC composition.
Population frequencies in Cells, Cells/CD326hi and Cells/CD24+ parent gate. Log2
fold change normalized to ENR_ENR treatment. 3 biol. replicates, indicated by
shape, mean highlighted (bottom) and visualized as dot plot, dot size corresponds
to absolute log2 fold change (top). (g) Flow cytometry of organoids cultured for 48
h followed by 72 h (48_72 h) as indicated. Staining of representative replicate,
ﬂuorescence intensity median and q25 and q75 percentile. Cell count in Cells
parent gate is indicated. (h) Flow cytometry of organoids cultured for 48 h
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
16
January 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 618552
Ostrop et al.
Epigenetic Regulation of Intestinal Epithelium
followed by 72 h (48_72 h) as indicated. SSC vs. CD24_PerCp-Cy5.5 staining in
Cells parent gate, frequency in SSChi_CD24+ gate is indicated.
Supplementary Figure 2 | (a) Segmentation results of combined ImageJ/Ilastik
(left) and ImageJ (right) workow of organoids treated with DMSO or inhibitors for
0–96 h. 4 biol. replicates. (b) Median organoid area and relative Lgr5 gene
expression in DMSO or olaparib-treated organoids. 4 biol. replicates, indicated by
shape. Median highlighted. Paired t-test. (c) Median organoid area and relative
Lgr5 gene expression in DMSO, CI-994, or LAQ824-treated organoids. 4 biol.
replicates. Median highlighted. Paired t-test. (d) Frequency of Lgr5-EGFP stem
cells in reporter organoids treated with DMSO or olaparib, measured by ﬂow
cytometry. Gating of representative replicate (top) and percentage of GFP+ cells
normalized to DMSO condition of 5 biol. replicates, indicated by shape. Mean
highlighted. Paired t-test (bottom). Minimum 5,000 viable cells in parent gate.
Supplementary Figure 3 | (a) Median organoid area and relative Lgr5 gene
expression in DMSO, SCG-CBP30, or I-CBP112 treated organoids. 4 biol.
replicates, indicated by shape. Median highlighted. Paired t-test. (b) Organoids
treated with DMSO, SGC-CBP30, or I-CBP112 for 96 h. Percentage of organoids
classiﬁed as big spheres in combined ImageJ/Ilastik segmentation workﬂow. 4
biol. replicates, indicated by shape. Mean highlighted. Paired t-test. (c) Confocal
microscopy of DMSO, SCG-CBP30, or I-CBP112 treated organoids. 10x
magniﬁcation, max. intensity projection. Full well, the organoids shown in
Figure 2B are marked. (d) Frequency of Lgr5-EGFP stem cells in reporter
organoids grown in ENR or ENR + CHIR and treated with DMSO, SCG-CBP30, or
I-CBP112, measured by ﬂow cytometry. Gating of representative replicate (top)
and percentage of GFP+ cells normalized to ENR DMSO condition of 3 biol.
replicates, indicated by shape. Mean highlighted. Paired t-test (bottom). (e)
Representative replicate of Lgr5-EGFP reporter organoids grown in ENR or ENR +
CHIR and treated with DMSO, SCG-CBP30, or I-CBP112 for 96 h. (f) Object area
of organoids grown in ENR, ENR + low R-Spondin (1%), ENR + low EGF (1
ng/ml), or ENR + IWP2 (Wnt pathway inhibitor) for 192 h, treated with DMSO,
SGC-CBP30, or I-CBP112. 3 biol. replicates, indicated by shape. (g)
Representative Replicate of organoids grown in ENR, or low growth factor
conditions for 192 h, treated with DMSO, SGC-CBP30, or I-CBP112. (h) mRNA
sequencing of untreated vs. I-CBP112 treated organoids. GSEA of target genes of
the convergence of murine and human transcription factors from the TRRUST
transcriptional interactions database and proteins interacting with murine or
human EP300 or CREBBP with a minimum medium experimental conﬁdence level
(≥0.4) from the STRING protein-protein interactions database. Enriched
transcription factor target gene sets with a p-value ≥0.1 are shown. All normalized
enrichment score (NES) values are indicated. (i) mRNA sequencing of untreated
vs. I-CBP112 treated organoids. GSEA for enterocyte, Paneth cell, goblet cell,
enteroen-docrine cell, tuft cell signatures from Haber et al. (GSE92332). (j) GSEA
for Gene Ontology biological process (GO:BP) terms. Normalized enrichment
score (NES) is indicated by color. Top 50 categories are shown. (k) GSEA for
Gene Ontology term “smoothened signaling pathway” (GO:0007224, NES =
2.0406), and “tissue morphogenesis” (GO:0048729, NES = 1.5148).
Supplementary Figure 4 | (a) Log2 of the Euclidean distance (“perturbation”) of
IEC lineage marker gene expression of organoids treated with DMSO or inhibitors
for 96 h, including gene Defa22. Samples treated with HDAC inhibitors were
excluded from the analysis. Order is the same as in Figure 4A. (b) Scheme of ﬂow
cytometry screen. Organoids were cultivated in 96-well plates, culture media was
changed daily. All pipetting steps were carried out with automated pipettes or
multichannel pipettes and samples were acquired on a ﬂow cytometer with
automated plate handling. (c) Flow cytometry screening of organoids, treated with
DMSO or inhibitors for 96 h. Population frequencies in Cells, FSC_CD326hi and
FSC_CD24+ parent gate. Log2 fold change of gated populations normalized to
DMSO treatment. Median of 4wells/3 biol. replicates, samples with ≤4,000 cells
and populations containing ≤40 cells were excluded. Dot size corresponds to
absolute log2 fold change. Tree is based on Euclidean distance clustering of
populations in Cells parent gate. (d) Gene expression of organoids treated with
DMSO or GSK484 for 96 h, measured by qRT-PCR. GSK484 is an inhibitor of
arginine deiminase (PADI4). 4 biol. replicates, indicated by shape. Median
highlighted. (e) Gene expression of organoids treated with DMSO or SGC0946 for
96 h, measured by qRT-PCR. SGC0946 is an inhibitor of H3 lysine-79 speciﬁc
Histone-lysine N-methyltransferase (DOT1L). 4 biol. replicates, indicated by shape.
Median highlighted. (f–k) Gene expression of Alpi, Lgr5, Lyz1, Defa22, Muc2,
Agr2, Chga, Chgb, Cpe, Dclk1, Trpm5 Gﬁ1b in organoids treated with DMSO or
inhibitors for 96 h, measured by qRT-PCR. xfold change relative to DMSO-treated
organoids. 4 biol. replicates, indicated by shape. Median highlighted. Paired t-test
and false discovery rate (FDR) shown for p-values ≤0.1. (l) DCLK1+ cells per
crypt in colon of Villin-Cre+ Lsd1f/f (KO) mice with intestine-speciﬁc deletion of
Lsd1 and wild type (WT) littermates. Immunoﬂuorescence staining of tissue
sections. Representative staining (left) and quantiﬁcation in 5/3 mice, mean
highlighted. Unpaired t-test (right).
Supplementary Figure 5 | (a) Gene expression of organoids treated with (+)-JQ1
(left) or bromosporine (right) for 96 h, measured by qRT-PCR. xfold change relative
to DMSO-treated organoids. 4 biol. replicates, indicated by shape. Median
highlighted. (b) Organoids treated with (+)-JQ1 or bromosporine for 96 h.
Representative replicate from screen experiment. (c) BRD transcripts per million
(tpm) values in mRNA sequencing datasets of small intestinal crypts (3 mice) and
organoids (4 biol. replicates) from Zwiggelaar et al. (2020) (control groups from
E-MTAB-9077, E-MTAB-7862). (d) Gene expression of organoids treated with
PFI-1 for 96 h, measured by qRT-PCR. PFI-1 is an inhibitor of BRD2/BRD4. xfold
change relative to DMSO-treated organoids. 4 biol. replicates, indicated by shape.
Median highlighted.
Supplementary Figure 6 | (a) Gene expression of organoids treated with
SGC707 (left) or MS049 (right) for 96 h, measured by qRT-PCR. xfold change
relative to DMSO-treated organoids. 4 biol. replicates, indicated by shape. Median
highlighted. (b) Median organoid area and relative Lgr5 gene expression in DMSO
or MS023-treated organoids. 4 biol. replicates, indicated by shape. Median
highlighted. Paired t-test. (c) Frequency of Lgr5-EGFP stem cells in reporter
organoids treated with DMSO or MS023 for 96 h, measured by ﬂow cytometry. 5
biol. replicates, indicated by shape. Mean highlighted (bottom). Paired t-test. (d)
Organoids treated with DMSO or MS023 for 96 h, and passaged to ENR for
additional 96 h. Images taken at 96 h timepoint and 24 and 96 h after passaging.
(e) mRNA sequencing of untreated vs. MS023 treated organoids. GSEA for Gene
Ontology biological process (GO:BP) terms. Normalized enrichment score (NES) is
indicated by color. Top 50 categories are shown. (f) mRNA sequencing of
untreated vs. MS023 treated organoids. GSEA for GO:BP terms “positive
regulation of cell development” (GO:0010720, NES = 1.6325), “lipid digestion”
(GO:0044241, NES = 1.9547), and “response to bacterium” (GO:0009617, NES
= 1.9257). (g) mRNA sequencing of untreated vs. MS023 treated organoids.
GSEA for GO:BP term “DNA repair” (GO:0006281, NES = −1.5531). (h) PRMT
transcripts per million (tpm) values in mRNA sequencing datasets of small intestinal
crypts (3 biol. replicates) and organoids (4 biol. replicates) from Zwiggelaar et al.
(2020) (control groups from E-MTAB-9077, E-MTAB-7862). (i) Box plots showing
tpm values from plate based scRNA sequencing from Haber et al. (GSE92332).
Tuft cell clusters have been merged into one group. (j) Apc-deﬁcient adenomas
treated with DMSO, MS023, or TC-E5003 for 96 h. Representative well. (k)
Organoids treated with DMSO, MS023, or TC-E5003 for 96 h. Representative
replicate. (l) Viability of organoids treated with DMSO, MS023, or TC-E5003 for 96
h, measured by ﬂow cytometry as frequency of Zombie Aqua-negative cells in
Singlet parent gate. 3 biol. replicates, indicated by shape.
Supplementary Table 1 | Inhibitors and concentrations used.
Supplementary Table 2 | qRT-PCR primers and probes used.
Supplementary Table 3 | Materials, reagents, and software used.
REFERENCES
Ackloo, S., Brown, P. J., and Müller, S. (2017). Chemical probes targeting
epigenetic proteins: applications beyond oncology. Epigenetics 12, 378–400.
doi: 10.1080/15592294.2017.1279371
Altan, B., Yokobori, T., Ide, M., Mochiki, E., Toyomasu, Y., Kogure,
N.,
et
al.
(2016).
Nuclear
PRMT1
expression
is
associated
with
poor
prognosis
and
chemosensitivity
in
gastric
cancer
patients.
Gastr.
Cancer
19,
789–797.
doi:
10.1007/s10120-015-
0551-7
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
17
January 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 618552
Ostrop et al.
Epigenetic Regulation of Intestinal Epithelium
Álvarez-Errico, D., Vento-Tormo, R., Sieweke, M., and Ballestar, E. (2015).
Epigenetic control of myeloid cell diﬀerentiation, identity and function. Nat.
Rev. Immunol. 15, 7–17. doi: 10.1038/nri3777
Arrowsmith, C. H., Bountra, C., Fish, P. V., Lee, K., and Schapira, M. (2012).
Epigenetic protein families: a new frontier for drug discovery. Nat. Rev. Drug
Discov. 11, 384–400. doi: 10.1038/nrd3674
Athar, A., Füllgrabe, A., George, N., Iqbal, H., Huerta, L., Ali, A., et al. (2019).
ArrayExpress update –from bulk to single-cell expression data. Nucl. Acids Res.
47, D711–D715. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky964
Atlasi, Y., and Stunnenberg, H. G. (2017). The interplay of epigenetic marks
during stem cell diﬀerentiation and development. Nat. Rev. Genet. 18, 643–658.
doi: 10.1038/nrg.2017.57
Attar, N., and Kurdistani, S. K. (2017). Exploitation of EP300 and CREBBP
lysine acetyltransferases by cancer. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 7.
doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a026534
Bao,
X.,
Siprashvili,
Z.,
Zarnegar,
B.
J.,
Shenoy,
R.
M.,
Rios,
E.
J.,
Nady, N., et al. (2017). CSNK1a1 regulates PRMT1 to maintain the
progenitor state in self-renewing somatic tissue. Dev. Cell 43, 227–239.e5.
doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2017.08.021
Bastide, P., Darido, C., Pannequin, J., Kist, R., Robine, S., Marty-Double, C.,
et al. (2007). Sox9 regulates cell proliferation and is required for Paneth
cell diﬀerentiation in the intestinal epithelium. J. Cell Biol. 178, 635–648.
doi: 10.1083/jcb.200704152
Beckers, T., Burkhardt, C., Wieland, H., Gimmnich, P., Ciossek, T., Maier, T.,
et al. (2007). Distinct pharmacological properties of second generation HDAC
inhibitors with the benzamide or hydroxamate head group. Int. J. Cancer 121,
1138–1148. doi: 10.1002/ijc.22751
Berg, S., Kutra, D., Kroeger, T., Straehle, C. N., Kausler, B. X., Haubold, C.,
et al. (2019). Ilastik: Interactive machine learning for (bio)image analysis. Nat.
Methods 16, 1226–1232. doi: 10.1038/s41592-019-0582-9
Biton, M., Haber, A. L., Rogel, N., Burgin, G., Beyaz, S., Schnell, A., et al. (2018). T
helper cell cytokines modulate intestinal stem cell renewal and diﬀerentiation.
Cell 175, 1307–1320.e22. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2018.10.008
Bolden, J. E., Tasdemir, N., Dow, L. E., van Es, J. H., Wilkinson, J. E., Zhao,
Z., et al. (2014). Inducible in vivo silencing of Brd4 identiﬁes potential
toxicities of sustained BET protein inhibition. Cell Rep. 8, 1919–1929.
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.08.025
Bornstein, C., Nevo, S., Giladi, A., Kadouri, N., Pouzolles, M., Gerbe, F., et al.
(2018). Single-cell mapping of the thymic stroma identiﬁes IL-25-producing
tuft epithelial cells. Nature 559, 622–626. doi: 10.1038/s41586-018-0346-1
Borten, M. A., Bajikar, S. S., Sasaki, N., Clevers, H., and Janes, K. A.
(2018). Automated brightﬁeld morphometry of 3D organoid populations by
OrganoSeg. Sci. Rep. 8:5319. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-18815-8
Brandenberg, N., Hoehnel, S., Kuttler, F., Homicsko, K., Ceroni, C., Ringel, T., et al.
(2020). High-throughput automated organoid culture via stem-cell aggregation
in microcavity arrays. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 1–12. doi: 10.1038/s41551-020-0565-2
Choi, S., Jeong, H.-J., Kim, H., Choi, D., Cho, S.-C., Seong, J. K., et al.
(2019). Skeletal muscle-speciﬁc Prmt1 deletion causes muscle atrophy
via deregulation of the PRMT6-FOXO3 axis. Autophagy 15, 1069–1081.
doi: 10.1080/15548627.2019.1569931
Creyghton, M. P., Cheng, A. W., Welstead, G. G., Kooistra, T., Carey, B. W., Steine,
E. J., et al. (2010). Histone H3K27ac separates active from poised enhancers and
predicts developmental state. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 21931–21936.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1016071107
Dobin, A., Davis, C. A., Schlesinger, F., Drenkow, J., Zaleski, C., Jha, S., et al.
(2013). STAR: Ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics 29, 15–21.
doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts635
Durinck, S., Moreau, Y., Kasprzyk, A., Davis, S., De Moor, B., Brazma, A.,
et al. (2005). BioMart and Bioconductor: a powerful link between biological
databases and microarray data analysis. Bioinformatics 21, 3439–3440.
doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bti525
Ebrahimi, A., Sevinç, K., Gürhan Sevinç, G., Cribbs, A. P., Philpott, M.,
Uyulur, F., et al. (2019). Bromodomain inhibition of the coactivators
CBP/EP300 facilitate cellular reprogramming. Nat. Chem. Biol. 15, 519–528.
doi: 10.1038/s41589-019-0264-z
el Marjou, F., Janssen, K.-P., Chang, B. H.-J., Li, M., Hindie, V., Chan, L., et al.
(2004). Tissue-speciﬁc and inducible Cre-mediated recombination in the gut
epithelium. Genesis 39, 186–193. doi: 10.1002/gene.20042
Elliott, E. N., and Kaestner, K. H. (2015). Epigenetic regulation of the intestinal
epithelium. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 72, 4139–4156. doi: 10.1007/s00018-015-1997-9
Eram, M. S., Shen, Y., Szewczyk, M., Wu, H., Senisterra, G., Li, F.,
et al. (2016). A potent, selective, and cell-active inhibitor of human
type I protein arginine methyltransferases. ACS Chem. Biol. 11, 772–781.
doi: 10.1021/acschembio.5b00839
Ewels, P., Magnusson, M., Lundin, S., and Käller, M. (2016). MultiQC: Summarize
analysis results for multiple tools and samples in a single report. Bioinformatics
32, 3047–3048. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btw354
Frankish, A., Diekhans, M., Ferreira, A.-M., Johnson, R., Jungreis, I., Loveland,
J., et al. (2019). GENCODE reference annotation for the human and mouse
genomes. Nucleic Acids Res. 47, D766–D773. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky955
Furumatsu, T., Tsuda, M., Yoshida, K., Taniguchi, N., Ito, T., Hashimoto, M.,
et al. (2005). Sox9 and p300 cooperatively regulate chromatin-mediated
transcription. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 35203–35208. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M502409200
Gehart, H., and Clevers, H. (2019). Tales from the crypt: new insights
into intestinal stem cells. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 16, 19–34.
doi: 10.1038/s41575-018-0081-y
Gerbe, F., Sidot, E., Smyth, D. J., Ohmoto, M., Matsumoto, I., Dardalhon, V.,
et al. (2016). Intestinal epithelial tuft cells initiate type 2 mucosal immunity to
helminth parasites. Nature 529, 226–230. doi: 10.1038/nature16527
Gitenay, D., and Baron, V. T. (2009). Is EGR1 a potential target for prostate cancer
therapy? Future Oncol. 5, 993–1003. doi: 10.2217/fon.09.67
Gonneaud, A., Jones, C., Turgeon, N., Lévesque, D., Asselin, C., Boudreau, F.,
et al. (2016a). A SILAC-based method for quantitative proteomic analysis of
intestinal organoids. Sci. Rep. 6:38195. doi: 10.1038/srep38195
Gonneaud, A., Turgeon, N., Boudreau, F., Perreault, N., Rivard, N., and Asselin, C.
(2016b). Distinct roles for intestinal epithelial cell-speciﬁc Hdac1 and Hdac2 in
the regulation of murine intestinal homeostasis. J. Cell. Physiol. 231, 436–448.
doi: 10.1002/jcp.25090
Goodman, R. H., and Smolik, S. (2000). CBP/p300 in cell growth, transformation,
and development. Genes Dev. 14, 1553–1577. doi: 10.1101/gad.14.13.1553
Guccione, E., and Richard, S. (2019). The regulation, functions and clinical
relevance of arginine methylation. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 20, 642–657.
doi: 10.1038/s41580-019-0155-x
Haber, A. L., Biton, M., Rogel, N., Herbst, R. H., Shekhar, K., Smillie, C., et al.
(2017). A single-cell survey of the small intestinal epithelium. Nature 551,
333–339. doi: 10.1038/nature24489
Han, H., Cho, J.-W., Lee, S., Yun, A., Kim, H., Bae, D., et al. (2018). TRRUST v2: an
expanded reference database of human and mouse transcriptional regulatory
interactions. Nucleic Acids Res. 46, D380–D386. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx1013
Hay, D. A., Fedorov, O., Martin, S., Singleton, D. C., Tallant, C., Wells, C.,
et al. (2014). Discovery and optimization of small-molecule ligands for the
CBP/p300 bromodomains. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 136, 9308–9319. doi: 10.1021/ja4
12434f
Huang, S., Litt, M., and Felsenfeld, G. (2005). Methylation of histone H4 by
arginine methyltransferase PRMT1 is essential in vivo for many subsequent
histone modiﬁcations. Genes Dev. 19, 1885–1893. doi: 10.1101/gad.1333905
Huch, M., Knoblich, J. A., Lutolf, M. P., and Martinez-Arias, A. (2017).
The hope and the hype of organoid research. Development 144, 938–941.
doi: 10.1242/dev.150201
Huijbregts, L., Petersen, M. B. K., Berthault, C., Hansson, M., Aiello, V., Rachdi,
L., et al. (2019). Bromodomain and extra terminal protein inhibitors promote
pancreatic endocrine cell fate. Diabetes 68, 761–773. doi: 10.2337/db18-0224
Ishizuya-Oka,
A.,
and
Shi,
Y.-B.
(2011).
Evolutionary
insights
into
postembryonic development of adult intestinal stem cells. Cell Biosci.
1:37. doi: 10.1186/2045-3701-1-37
Jadhav, U., Cavazza, A., Banerjee, K. K., Xie, H., O’Neill, N. K., Saenz-Vash,
V., et al. (2019). Extensive recovery of embryonic enhancer and gene
memory stored in hypomethylated enhancer DNA. Mol. Cell 74, 542–554.e5.
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2019.02.024
Jadhav, U., Saxena, M., O’Neill, N. K., Saadatpour, A., Yuan, G.-C., Herbert, Z.,
et al. (2017). Dynamic reorganization of chromatin accessibility signatures
during dediﬀerentiation of secretory precursors into Lgr5+ intestinal stem cells.
Cell Stem Cell 21, 65–77.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2017.05.001
Jarrold, J., and Davies, C. C. (2019). PRMTs and arginine methylation:
cancer’s
best-kept
secret?
Trends
Mol.
Med.
25,
993–1009.
doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2019.05.007
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
18
January 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 618552
Ostrop et al.
Epigenetic Regulation of Intestinal Epithelium
Kaaij, L. T., van de Wetering, M., Fang, F., Decato, B., Molaro, A., van de Werken,
H. J., et al. (2013). DNA methylation dynamics during intestinal stem cell
diﬀerentiation reveals enhancers driving gene expression in the villus. Genome
Biol. 14:R50. doi: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-5-r50
Kassis,
T.,
Hernandez-Gordillo,
V.,
Langer,
R.,
and
Griﬃth,
L.
G.
(2019).
OrgaQuant:
human
intestinal
organoid
localization
and
quantiﬁcation using deep convolutional neural networks. Sci. Rep. 9:12479.
doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-48874-y
Kazakevych, J., Sayols, S., Messner, B., Krienke, C., and Soshnikova, N.
(2017). Dynamic changes in chromatin states during speciﬁcation and
diﬀerentiation of adult intestinal stem cells. Nucleic Acids Res. 45, 5770–5784.
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx167
Kerenyi,
M.
A.,
Shao,
Z.,
Hsu,
Y.-J.,
Guo,
G.,
Luc,
S.,
O’Brien,
K.,
et al. (2013). Histone demethylase Lsd1 represses hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cell signatures during blood cell maturation. eLife 2:e00633.
doi: 10.7554/eLife.00633
Kim, T.-H., Li, F., Ferreiro-Neira, I., Ho, L.-L., Luyten, A., Nalapareddy, K., et al.
(2014). Broadly permissive intestinal chromatin underlies lateral inhibition and
cell plasticity. Nature 506, 511–515. doi: 10.1038/nature12903
Kim, Y. H., Larsen, H. L., Rué, P., Lemaire, L. A., Ferrer, J., and Grapin-
Botton, A. (2015). Cell cycle-dependent diﬀerentiation dynamics balances
growth and endocrine diﬀerentiation in the pancreas. PLoS Biol. 13:e1002111.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002111
Kishida, K., Pearce, S. C., Yu, S., Gao, N., and Ferraris, R. P. (2017).
Nutrient sensing by absorptive and secretory progenies of small intestinal
stem cells. Am. J. Physiol. Gastroint. Liver Physiol. 312, G592–G605.
doi: 10.1152/ajpgi.00416.2016
Koppens, M. A. J., Bounova, G., Gargiulo, G., Tanger, E., Janssen, H., Cornelissen-
Steijger, P., et al. (2016). Deletion of polycomb repressive complex 2 from
mouse intestine causes loss of stem cells. Gastroenterology 151, 684–697.e12.
doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2016.06.020
Kraiczy, J., and Zilbauer, M. (2019). Intestinal epithelial organoids as tools to
study epigenetics in gut health and disease. Stem Cells Int. 2019:7242415.
doi: 10.1155/2019/7242415
Lee,
B.-K.,
Jang,
Y.,
Kim,
M.,
LeBlanc,
L.,
Rhee,
C.,
Lee,
J.,
et
al.
(2019).
Super-enhancer-guided
mapping
of
regulatory
networks
controlling
mouse
trophoblast
stem
cells.
Nat.
Commun.
10:4749.
doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-12720-6
Leggett, R. M., Ramirez-Gonzalez, R. H., Clavijo, B., Waite, D., and Davey,
R.
P.
(2013).
Sequencing
quality
assessment
tools
to
enable
data-
driven informatics for high throughput genomics. Front. Genet. 4:288.
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2013.00288
Lehman, S. M., Chen, H., Burgos, E. S., Maron, M., Gayatri, S., Nieves, E., et al.
(2020). Transcriptomic and proteomic regulation through abundant, dynamic,
and independent arginine methylation by Type I and Type II PRMTs. bioRxiv
[Preprint]. doi: 10.1101/2020.06.23.167601
Liao, Y., Smyth, G. K., and Shi, W. (2014). featureCounts: an eﬃcient
general purpose program for assigning sequence reads to genomic features.
Bioinformatics 30, 923–930. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btt656
Love, M. I., Huber, W., and Anders, S. (2014). Moderated estimation of fold
change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 15:550.
doi: 10.1186/s13059-014-0550-8
Luu, L., Matthews, Z. J., Armstrong, S. D., Powell, P. P., Wileman, T.,
Wastling, J. M., et al. (2018). Proteomic proﬁling of enteroid cultures skewed
toward development of speciﬁc epithelial lineages. Proteomics 18:1800132.
doi: 10.1002/pmic.201800132
Mateo, J., Lord, C. J., Serra, V., Tutt, A., Balma na, J., Castroviejo-Bermejo, M., et al.
(2019). A decade of clinical development of PARP inhibitors in perspective.
Ann. Oncol. 30, 1437–1447. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdz192
Mathioudaki, K., Papadokostopoulou, A., Scorilas, A., Xynopoulos, D., Agnanti,
N., and Talieri, M. (2008). The PRMT1 gene expression pattern in colon cancer.
Br. J. Cancer 99, 2094–2099. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6604807
Matsuda, H., and Shi, Y.-B. (2010). An essential and evolutionarily conserved role
of protein arginine methyltransferase 1 for adult intestinal stem cells during
postembryonic development. Stem Cells 28, 2073–2083. doi: 10.1002/stem.529
Morgan, R., Mortensson, E., and Williams, A. (2018). Targeting LGR5 in
colorectal cancer: therapeutic gold or too plastic? Br. J. Cancer 118, 1410–1418.
doi: 10.1038/s41416-018-0118-6
Mu noz, J., Stange, D. E., Schepers, A. G., van de Wetering, M., Koo, B.-K.,
Itzkovitz, S., et al. (2012). The Lgr5 intestinal stem cell signature: Robust
expression of proposed quiescent ’+4’ cell markers. EMBO J. 31, 3079–3091.
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.166
Musiani, D., Giambruno, R., Massignani, E., Ippolito, M. R., Maniaci, M., Jammula,
S., et al. (2020). PRMT1 Is recruited via DNA-PK to chromatin where it sustains
the senescence-associated secretory phenotype in response to cisplatin. Cell
Rep. 30, 1208–1222.e9. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2019.12.061
Nakagawa, A., Adams, C. E., Huang, Y., Hamarneh, S. R., Liu, W., Von Alt, K.
N., et al. (2016). Selective and reversible suppression of intestinal stem cell
diﬀerentiation by pharmacological inhibition of BET bromodomains. Sci. Rep.
6:20390. doi: 10.1038/srep20390
Namwanje, M., Liu, L., Chan, M., Aaron, N., Kraakman, M. J., and
Qiang, L. (2019). The depot-speciﬁc and essential roles of CBP/p300 in
regulating adipose plasticity. J. Endocrinol. 240, 257–269. doi: 10.1530/JOE-
18-0361
Ortega, E., Rengachari, S., Ibrahim, Z., Hoghoughi, N., Gaucher, J., Holehouse,
A. S., et al. (2018). Transcription factor dimerization activates the p300
acetyltransferase. Nature 562, 538–544. doi: 10.1038/s41586-018-0621-1
Ostrop, J., Zwiggelaar, R., Pedersen, M. T., Gerbe, F., Bösl, K., Lindholm, H.
T., et al. (2020). A semi-automated organoid screening method demonstrates
epigenetic control of intestinal epithelial maturation. bioRxiv [Preprint].
doi: 10.1101/2020.07.23.217414
Parmar, N., Burrows, K., Lindholm, H. T., Zwiggelaar, R. T., Martín-
Alonso, M., Fosslie, M., et al. (2020). Intestinal-epithelial LSD1 controls
cytoskeletal-mediated cell identity including goblet cell eﬀector responses
required for gut inﬂammatory and infectious diseases. bioRxiv [Preprint].
doi: 10.1101/2020.07.09.186114
Picaud, S., Fedorov, O., Thanasopoulou, A., Leonards, K., Jones, K., Meier,
J., et al. (2015). Generation of a selective small molecule inhibitor of the
CBP/p300 bromodomain for leukemia therapy. Cancer Res. 75, 5106–5119.
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0236
Puri, P. L., Avantaggiati, M. L., Balsano, C., Sang, N., Graessmann, A.,
Giordano, A., et al. (1997). P300 is required for MyoD-dependent cell
cycle arrest and muscle-speciﬁc gene transcription. EMBO J. 16, 369–383.
doi: 10.1093/emboj/16.2.369
Raab, J. R., Tulasi, D. Y., Wager, K. E., Morowitz, J. M., Magness, S. T.,
and Gracz, A. D. (2020). Quantitative classiﬁcation of chromatin dynamics
reveals regulators of intestinal stem cell diﬀerentiation. Development 147.
doi: 10.1242/dev.181966
Raisner, R., Kharbanda, S., Jin, L., Jeng, E., Chan, E., Merchant, M., et al.
(2018). Enhancer activity requires CBP/P300 bromodomain-dependent histone
H3K27 acetylation. Cell Rep. 24, 1722–1729. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2018.07.041
Ramos, Y. F. M., Hestand, M. S., Verlaan, M., Krabbendam, E., Ariyurek, Y.,
van Galen, M., et al. (2010). Genome-wide assessment of diﬀerential roles for
p300 and CBP in transcription regulation. Nucleic Acids Res. 38, 5396–5408.
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq184
Ray, G., and Longworth, M. S. (2019). Epigenetics, DNA organization,
and
inﬂammatory
bowel
disease.
Inﬂamm.
Bowel
Dis.
25,
235–247.
doi: 10.1093/ibd/izy330
Sampurno, S., Bijenhof, A., Cheasley, D., Xu, H., Robine, S., Hilton, D.,
et al. (2013). The Myb-p300-CREB axis modulates intestine homeostasis,
radiosensitivity and tumorigenesis. Cell Death Dis. 4:e605. doi: 10.1038/cddis.
2013.119
Sarkans, U., Gostev, M., Athar, A., Behrangi, E., Melnichuk, O., Ali, A., et al. (2018).
The BioStudies database—one stop shop for all data supporting a life sciences
study. Nucleic Acids Res. 46, D1266–D1270. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx965
Sato, T., and Clevers, H. (2012). “Primary mouse small intestinal epithelial cell
cultures,” in Epithelial Cell Culture Protocols. Methods in Molecular Biology
(Methods and Protocols), eds S. Randell and M. Fulcher, Vol. 945 (Totowa, NJ:
Humana Press). doi: 10.1007/978-1-62703-125-7_19
Sato, T., van Es, J. H., Snippert, H. J., Stange, D. E., Vries, R. G., van den Born, M.,
et al. (2011). Paneth cells constitute the niche for Lgr5 stem cells in intestinal
crypts. Nature 469, 415–418. doi: 10.1038/nature09637
Sato, T., Vries, R. G., Snippert, H. J., van de Wetering, M., Barker, N., Stange,
D. E., et al. (2009). Single Lgr5 stem cells build crypt-villus structures in
vitro without a mesenchymal niche. Nature 459, 262–265. doi: 10.1038/nature
07935
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
19
January 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 618552
Ostrop et al.
Epigenetic Regulation of Intestinal Epithelium
Scheer, S., Ackloo, S., Medina, T. S., Schapira, M., Li, F., Ward, J. A., et al. (2019).
A chemical biology toolbox to study protein methyltransferases and epigenetic
signaling. Nat. Commun. 10, 1–14. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-07905-4
Schindelin, J., Arganda-Carreras, I., Frise, E., Kaynig, V., Longair, M., Pietzsch, T.,
et al. (2012). Fiji: An open-source platform for biological-image analysis. Nat.
Methods 9, 676–682. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.2019
Schindelin, J., Rueden, C. T., Hiner, M. C., and Eliceiri, K. W. (2015). The ImageJ
ecosystem: an open platform for biomedical image analysis. Mol. Reprod. Dev.
82, 518–529. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22489
Serra, D., Mayr, U., Boni, A., Lukonin, I., Rempﬂer, M., Challet Meylan, L.,
et al. (2019). Self-organization and symmetry breaking in intestinal organoid
development. Nature 569, 66–72. doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-1146-y
Sheaﬀer, K. L., Kim, R., Aoki, R., Elliott, E. N., Schug, J., Burger, L., et al. (2014).
DNA methylation is required for the control of stem cell diﬀerentiation in the
small intestine. Genes Dev. 28, 652–664. doi: 10.1101/gad.230318.113
Szklarczyk, D., Gable, A. L., Lyon, D., Junge, A., Wyder, S., Huerta-Cepas, J.,
et al. (2019). STRING v11: Protein–protein association networks with increased
coverage, supporting functional discovery in genome-wide experimental
datasets. Nucleic Acids Res. 47, D607–D613. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky1131
The Gene Ontology Consortium (2019). The Gene Ontology resource: 20 years and
still GOing strong. Nucleic Acids Res. 47, D330–D338. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky1055
Van, P., Jiang, W., Gottardo, R., and Finak, G. (2018). ggCyto: Next
generation open-source visualization software for cytometry. Bioinformatics 34,
3951–3953. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bty441
von Moltke, J., Ji, M., Liang, H.-E., and Locksley, R. M. (2016). Tuft-cell-derived IL-
25 regulates an intestinal ILC2-epithelial response circuit. Nature 529, 221–225.
doi: 10.1038/nature16161
Wang, F., Marshall, C. B., and Ikura, M. (2013). Transcriptional/epigenetic
regulator
CBP/p300
in
tumorigenesis:
structural
and
functional
versatility
in
target
recognition.
Cell.
Mol.
Life
Sci.
70,
3989–4008.
doi: 10.1007/s00018-012-1254-4
Weinert, B. T., Narita, T., Satpathy, S., Srinivasan, B., Hansen, B. K., Schölz, C.,
et al. (2018). Time-resolved analysis reveals rapid dynamics and broad scope of
the CBP/p300 acetylome. Cell 174, 231–244.e12. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2018.04.033
Weisberg, E., Catley, L., Kujawa, J., Atadja, P., Remiszewski, S., Fuerst, P., et al.
(2004). Histone deacetylase inhibitor NVP-LAQ824 has signiﬁcant activity
against myeloid leukemia cells in vitro and in vivo. Leukemia 18, 1951–1963.
doi: 10.1038/sj.leu.2403519
Wickham, H., Averick, M., Bryan, J., Chang, W., McGowan, L. D., François,
R., et al. (2019). Welcome to the Tidyverse. J. Open Source Softw. 4:1686.
doi: 10.21105/joss.01686
Williams, E., Moore, J., Li, S. W., Rustici, G., Tarkowska, A., Chessel, A., et al.
(2017). Image data resource: a bioimage data integration and publication
platform. Nat. Methods 14, 775–781. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.4326
Yang, Q., Bermingham, N. A., Finegold, M. J., and Zoghbi, H. Y. (2001).
Requirement
of
Math1
for
secretory
cell
lineage
commitment
in
the
mouse
intestine.
Science
294,
2155–2158.
doi:
10.1126/science.10
65718
Yin, X., Farin, H. F., van Es, J. H., Clevers, H., Langer, R., and Karp, J. M. (2014).
Niche-independent high-purity cultures of Lgr5 + intestinal stem cells and their
progeny. Nat. Methods 11, 106–112. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.2737
Yu, G., Lam, T. T.-Y., Zhu, H., and Guan, Y. (2018). Two methods for mapping
and visualizing associated data on phylogeny using Ggtree. Mol. Biol. Evol. 35,
3041–3043. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msy194
Yu, G., Wang, L.-G., Han, Y., and He, Q.-Y. (2012). clusterProﬁler: An R package
for comparing biological themes among gene clusters. OMICS 16, 284–287.
doi: 10.1089/omi.2011.0118
Zhong,
X.,
and
Jin,
Y.
(2009).
Critical
roles
of
coactivator
p300
in
mouse
embryonic
stem
cell
diﬀerentiation
and
nanog
expression.
J.
Biol.
Chem.
284,
9168–9175.
doi:
10.1074/jbc.M805
562200
Zhu, A., Ibrahim, J. G., and Love, M. I. (2019). Heavy-tailed prior distributions
for sequence count data:
Removing the noise and preserving large
diﬀerences.
Bioinformatics
35,
2084–2092.
doi:
10.1093/bioinformatics/
bty895
Zwiggelaar, R. T., Lindholm, H. T., Fosslie, M., Pedersen, M. T., Ohta, Y., Díez-
Sánchez, A., et al. (2020). LSD1 represses a neonatal/reparative gene program
in adult intestinal epithelium. Sci. Adv. 6:eabc0367. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.
abc0367
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2021 Ostrop, Zwiggelaar, Terndrup Pedersen, Gerbe, Bösl, Lindholm,
Díez-Sánchez, Parmar, Radetzki, von Kries, Jay, Jensen, Arrowsmith and Oudhoﬀ.
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums
is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited
and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not
comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
20
January 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 618552
