remote sensing 
Article
A New Algorithm for Daily Sea Ice Lead
Identiﬁcation in the Arctic and Antarctic Winter
from Thermal-Infrared Satellite Imagery
Fabian Reiser *
, Sascha Willmes
and Günther Heinemann
Department of Environmental Meteorology, University of Trier, 54296 Trier, Germany;
willmes@uni-trier.de (S.W.); heinemann@uni-trier.de (G.H.)
* Correspondence: reiser@uni-trier.de
Received: 26 March 2020; Accepted: 13 June 2020; Published: 17 June 2020
Abstract: The presence of sea ice leads in the sea ice cover represents a key feature in polar regions
by controlling the heat exchange between the relatively warm ocean and cold atmosphere due to
increased ﬂuxes of turbulent sensible and latent heat. Sea ice leads contribute to the sea ice production
and are sources for the formation of dense water which affects the ocean circulation. Atmospheric and
ocean models strongly rely on observational data to describe the respective state of the sea ice since
numerical models are not able to produce sea ice leads explicitly. For the Arctic, some lead datasets
are available, but for the Antarctic, no such data yet exist. Our study presents a new algorithm
with which leads are automatically identiﬁed in satellite thermal infrared images. A variety of lead
metrics is used to distinguish between true leads and detection artefacts with the use of fuzzy logic.
We evaluate the outputs and provide pixel-wise uncertainties. Our data yield daily sea ice lead
maps at a resolution of 1 km2 for the winter months November– April 2002/03–2018/19 (Arctic) and
April–September 2003–2019 (Antarctic), respectively. The long-term average of the lead frequency
distributions show distinct features related to bathymetric structures in both hemispheres.
Dataset: 10.1594/PANGAEA.917588
Dataset License: CC-BY
Keywords: sea ice; leads; MODIS; Arctic; Antarctic; polar regions; image processing; fuzzy logic,
thermal infrared remote sensing
1. Introduction
Sea ice leads are a key feature in the closed pack ice, which represent elongated cracks covering up
to hundreds of kilometers in length where open water and thin ice is present. Thereby, they inﬂuence
the ocean/sea-ice/atmosphere interactions dramatically.
Leads are predominantly induced by
mechanical stress, namely wind stress and ocean currents [1] and they signiﬁcantly increase the
turbulent heat ﬂuxes between the relatively warm ocean and cold atmosphere during wintertime [2,3].
Sea ice leads inﬂuence the lower atmosphere by reducing the overall sea ice concentration and thereby
warming the regional atmospheric boundary layer [4,5]. In an idealized model study, Reference [6]
show that small decreases in the sea ice fraction by 1% at ice concentrations larger than 90% cause a
rise of the near-surface temperature by up to 3.5 K. According to Reference [7], the heat ﬂux at constant
sea ice concentration is increased when multiple leads are present compared to a single and equal area
of open water. Because of the associated ocean heat loss in leads, new sea ice is produced, causing
signiﬁcant salt rejection, which in turn affects dense water formation and the ocean circulation [1,8–10].
Remote Sens. 2020, 12, 1957; doi:10.3390/rs12121957
www.mdpi.com/journal/remotesensing
Remote Sens. 2020, 12, 1957
2 of 16
Ice-free areas including sea ice leads were also identiﬁed as sources for methane emissions [11,12].
The relevance of leads, polynyas and the sea ice edge for marine species is shown in Reference [13].
Weather prediction, climate, and ocean models rely strongly on detailed information on the respective
state of the sea ice. The majority of numerical models, however, cannot produce sea ice leads explicitly
and sea ice concentrations from passive microwave data are too coarse to resolve leads [14,15].
Thus there is a need to develop and provide new algorithms to retrieve daily maps of sea ice leads
on circum-polar scales in both hemispheres. So far, no dataset exists which describes a climatology
of the daily distribution of sea ice leads in both polar regions in a consistent way. Almost all of the
previously published studies are conducted for the Arctic and focus on smaller regions and time scales
or have coarser geometric resolutions.
The potential of thermal infrared satellite data for the detection of sea ice leads is shown in
References [8,16]. However, lead detections then there rely on clear-sky situations and on winter
months only to make use of a high temperature contrast between open water and sea ice. Leads in the
Arctic are manually identiﬁed based on thermal imagery in Reference [17] with a 5-year climatology of
wintertime leads derived for the years of 1979/1980 to 1984/1985. Data from the Moderate-Resolution
Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) are used in References [18,19] to derive maps of potential open
water per pixel and they furthermore evaluate the potential of this approach as a sea ice concentration
retrieval method. The differentiation between thick and thin sea ice, including polynyas and leads,
was successfully demonstrated in Reference [20], where a polarization ratio of two frequencies of
the Advanced Microwave Scanning Radiometer-EOS (AMSR-E) was used. Due to the footprint of
the sensor, they identify only leads broader than 3 km and produce daily wintertime lead maps for
the Arctic for the winters 2002–2012. The follow-up study from Reference [21] presents a 9-year lead
climatology in the Arctic Ocean, revealing multiple hot spots with increased lead observations in the
Beaufort Gyre and close to the Fram Strait.
Leads in the Arctic are identiﬁed in SAR images from CryoSat-2 and lead fractions and lead width
distributions are derived by optimizing the threshold applied on the backscattered waveforms [22].
However, data are presented only for the winters 2011 and 2013 and the derived sea ice products
have a comparably low spatial resolution of around 100 km × 100 km. Another approach uses
thermal imagery from MODIS, where sea ice leads are identiﬁed based on their positive surface
temperature anomaly [23]. The authors produce daily maps of sea ice leads with a spatial resolution of
1.5 km × 1.5 km for the months of January to April in the Arctic from 2002 to 2015 [24]. Remaining
cloud artefacts that usually represented an obstacle for an automatic lead detection are removed with
a fuzzy inference system.
The available lead fractions from AMSR-E [20] are evaluated in Reference [25] by using lead
observations in SAR data as a reference, and show that AMSR-E overestimates the lead fraction
compared to the SAR data, particularly the lead fraction classes near 100%. A further lead retrieval
algorithm for CryoSat-2 data was developed by Reference [26] making use of the speciﬁc waveform of
the backscattered signal to identify leads as in Reference [22]. They present monthly averages for lead
fractions in the Arctic on a 10 km grid covering the years 2011 to 2016 and compare their results with
the products from Reference [20] (AMSR-E), Reference [23] (MODIS), and Reference [22] (CryoSat-2)
for the respective period. They reveal differences in the data sets due to differences in the spatial
and temporal resolution of the used satellite sensors. A study by Reference [27] uses MODIS thermal
infrared data with an approach similar to References [23,24] using a ﬁxed threshold and a sequence of
multiple tests to produce daily Arctic lead maps.
Since no lead fraction data set exists at this time for the Antarctic, this study aims at presenting
a new and robust lead retrieval algorithm that is applicable in both polar regions. Furthermore,
we present long-term average lead frequencies for wintertime sea ice in the Arctic (November–April
2002/03–2018/19) and the Southern Ocean (April–September 2003–2019). The algorithm expands
upon the work of Reference [23], including major improvements and an adaption to the Southern
Hemisphere. Therefore, not only a new lead dataset for the Antarctic is obtained, but also the existing
lead dataset for the Arctic [24] receives an extension and update. We use satellite thermal infrared
Remote Sens. 2020, 12, 1957
3 of 16
data from MODIS to derive daily maps of leads for the winter months, that is, November to April for
Arctic sea ice and April to September for Antarctic sea ice, respectively, including pixel-based retrieval
uncertainties. In Section 2, we present the used data and applied methods in detail, which comprise the
tile-based processing, the fuzzy ﬁltering and manual quality control for both hemispheres. In Section 3,
we show example results of the new lead retrieval approach and go ahead with a discussion of the
implemented methods, showing strengths and potential shortcomings of the algorithm in Section 4.
2. Data and Methods
We use collection 6 of MYD/MOD29 ice surface temperature (IST) data [28] to infer daily sea
ice leads for both polar regions. MODIS, onboard the two satellites Terra and Aqua (NASA-EOS),
provides data since 2000 (Terra) and 2002 (Aqua) and acquisitions are stored in 5-min tiles with a 1 km
spatial resolution at nadir. The product includes the MODIS land and cloud mask. An overview of the
most important information on both polar regions is presented in Table 1. The cloud fraction for sea
ice areas in both hemispheres is deﬁned as the long-term average of daily cloud fractions. The cloud
fraction is derived from the MODIS cloud mask and represents the fraction of cloud observations in
relation to the maximum number of tiles per pixel.
Table 1. Key facts about the data used for both hemispheres.
Hemisphere
Grid
Observation Period
Geographical
Coverage
Number
of Tiles
Cloud Fraction
%, Overall
Arctic
EPSG:3413
2002/03–2018/19,
Nov–Apr
north of 60◦
421,953
44
Antarctic
EPSG:3412
2003–2019, Apr–Sep
south of 50◦
514,950
61
Due to the open water or thin ice present in leads, these can be identiﬁed as a warm temperature
anomaly, surrounded by cold sea ice. Although the MODIS cloud mask is applied to select clear-sky
pixels, the satellite image may be partially covered by clouds or fog that is not included in the
mask. A signiﬁcant fraction of unidentiﬁed clouds appear as warm features, which are consequently
misinterpreted as leads by unsupervised algorithms. Therefore, a two-stage processing chain is applied,
consisting of (1) lead detection, where potential leads are retrieved from the IST data and (2) ﬁltering,
where a fuzzy ﬁlter is applied to remove false detections. An overview of the processing is provided in
Figure 1.
Figure 1. Conceptual work-ﬂow of the key routines in the lead retrieval algorithm. The routine
is structured in two ascending processing levels, where the raw data are used as input for the
tile-based and hemisphere-independent processing (1st level). The daily composites are ﬁltered
with the Fuzzy Cloud Artefact Filter (FCAF) and ﬁnally a retrieval uncertainty is calculated for all lead
pixels (2nd level).
Remote Sens. 2020, 12, 1957
4 of 16
The tile displayed in Figure 2 shows the IST from the MYD29 product (Aqua) for a region in the
central Arctic on January 21, 2008. The presented data type corresponds to the 0-th processing step
(raw data) in Figure 1. The warm signature of sea ice leads is clearly visible (arrow 1). The MODIS land
and cloud mask are also shown. Undetected clouds are visible in the satellite image and can appear as
warm features (arrow 2) and represent the major source of errors and noise in automatically derived
lead maps. For the preparation of daily maps we make use of multiple daily satellite overpasses and
an associated stacking to ﬁll data gaps that result from the MODIS cloud mask.
Figure 2. Moderate-Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) ice surface temperature (2008,
January 21, UTC 0105, Arctic), with the MODIS cloudmask (green) and landmask (gray). Distinct sea
ice leads (arrow 1) are visible due to their warmer temperatures and elongated structure. Areas affected
by unidentiﬁed warm clouds are also indicated (arrow 2). The white frame in the overview map shows
the location of the MODIS tile.
Remote Sens. 2020, 12, 1957
5 of 16
First, potential leads are identiﬁed from the local surface temperature anomalies. To support
the subsequent ﬁltering, additional metrics are derived. This step is identical for both the Northern
and Southern Hemispheres (Figure 1, box 1). A selection of derived parameters is provided in
Figure 3, where the IST is shown as reference (Figure 3a). Based on the IST, local thresholding with
a 51 × 51 kernel is applied on the tiles to identify pixels that are signiﬁcantly warmer than the local
neighborhood (Figure 3a, arrow 2). By this, large-scale temperature gradients due to different air
masses are omitted while the relative surface temperature contrast is preserved. From this, we obtain
potential leads (Figure 3b). This parameter also includes other warm temperature anomalies, which
are not associated to sea ice leads, namely cloud artefacts (top arrow 1). Therefore, we derive a
set of additional metrics that will allow for a better differentiation between true leads and artefacts.
The potential open water POTOWA is based on the IST and describes the fraction of a pixel covered by
open water [16,18], which is the inverse of sea-ice concentration (Figure 3c). This concept assumes that
a pixel is composed of a mixture of different surface types, namely open water and sea ice. For leads
(arrow 2), the POTOWA values are higher than in the surrounding. Warm features arising from clouds,
for example arrow 1, have low to medium POTOWA values. By applying a Canny ﬁlter [29] on the
POTOWA, strong gradients are detected, which are indicative of sea ice lead edges (Figure 3d). By this,
most of the features with low to medium POTOWA are excluded.
We derive additionally a linearity measure of potential lead objects by calculating two-dimensional
angular variability similar to a Hough transform (Figure 3e). Consequently, leads have the highest
linearity values combined with medium to high POTOWA (arrow 2), while cloud artefacts
are characterized by low linearity scores combined with low to medium POTOWA (arrow 1).
We furthermore derive a predicted lead indicator for every pixel based on different input parameters,
for example, the linearity, Canny edges, and other texture parameters derived from gray-level
co-occurrence analysis namely the dissimilarity, homogeneity, and correlation (Figure 3f). For this
purpose, a universal logistic regression model is set up and trained with manually classiﬁed IST tiles.
The output of the logistic regression is binary, where 1 (yellow pixels) represents predicted true leads.
Here, cloud artefacts (arrow 1, Figure 3f) are classiﬁed as ‘no leads’.
After all parameters are derived, the tiles are combined to daily stacks by reprojecting them to the
respective reference grid (ARC: EPSG:3413, ANT: EPSG:3412) by calculating the sum or average for
the respective parameter (see also Figure 1 box 1c). As an example for one of the obtained daily stacks,
Figure 4 shows the potential lead count as the daily sum of potential lead detections for the Arctic (left,
26 November 2007) and the Antarctic (right, 23 May 2018), with the sea ice cover (>15% concentration)
derived from AMSR-E/AMSR-2 in the background (blue). Areas that were permanently covered by
clouds during the respective day are colored black. The potential lead count indicates the presence
of leads, where the maximum value varies around 12 daily observations, depending on the number
of tiles per day and on the cloud coverage during a day. High values show rather persistent lead
objects (yellow arrows), while lower values indicate the presence of less frequently identiﬁed leads
or artefacts (red arrows), that is, remaining warm cloud features that fulﬁlled the criteria of being
identiﬁed as a potential lead. Due to the faster movement of clouds compared to the sea ice cover,
a false lead detection from cloud artefacts generally receives low counts. Some real leads may receive
low counts (e.g., yellow arrow 1 in the Fram Strait) due to clouds, which reduce the total number of
observations per day, or due to closing of the leads during the day because of changes in the sea ice
drift, which makes the count parameter by itself insufﬁcient to separate leads from artefacts. For this
reason, we prepare additional daily stacks from the metrics that are described above, for example,
linearity and texture parameters. For the day shown in Figure 4, sea ice leads indicated by yellow
arrows are mainly visible in the Beaufort Gyre and the Fram Strait (left, Arctic) and in the Antarctic in
the southeastern Weddell Sea and Ross Sea (right, Antarctic).
Remote Sens. 2020, 12, 1957
6 of 16
Figure 3. Set of the most important parameters derived during the tile-level approach (1st level,
Figure 1). The ice surface temperature is shown as reference with two arrows pointing to warm cloud
artefacts (arrow 1) and sea ice leads (arrow 2). The MODIS cloud and landmask are colored green
and gray, respectively (a). The potential leads (b), potential open water (POTOWA, c), edges derived
by the Canny-edge detector (d), the linearity (e), and the multi-parameter predicted lead indicator (f)
are presented.
Remote Sens. 2020, 12, 1957
7 of 16
Figure 4. Examples of daily counts of potential leads for the Arctic (26 November 2007, left) and
Antarctic (23 May 2016, right). Black colors indicate persistent areas covered by clouds during the
entire day, thus prevent the observation of ice surface temperature. Sea ice leads are characterized by
high counts (yellow arrow), while artefacts by lower values (red arrows). The Advanced Microwave
Scanning Radiometer-EOS (AMSR-E) / AMSR-2 sea ice area (sea ice concentration >= 15%) is shown in
pale blue colors as reference for the areas where sea ice leads can be expected for the respective day.
To further differentiate between true leads and warm temperature artefacts, we use an extended
version of the fuzzy ﬁlter introduced by Reference [23] and use two different set ups for each
hemisphere. With fuzzy logic a multi-layer input data set can be processed and translated into
a combined, single-layer result by using a set of membership functions and rules [30]. The great
advantage over black-box algorithms where the transfer functions are not directly accessible
(e.g., neural networks, clustering algorithms) is that the user is able to modify the system by selecting
speciﬁc membership functions and rules. The deﬁned rules are of linguistic format, hence they can be
interpreted easily and expert knowledge can be included in a straightforward manner. The output data
is continuous and determines the degree to which a certain pixel belongs to the output membership,
hereafter called Lead Score (LS). It can be understood as an indirect measure of uncertainty and is
re-calculated into uncertainty by conducting a manual quality control in the subsequent processing
step. The selection of input parameters, deﬁnition of membership functions and rules involves user
knowledge and has the aim to maximize both the true positive classiﬁcation of sea ice leads and
the obtained LS range. In the following we refer to this ﬁltering as the Fuzzy Cloud Artefact Filter
(FCAF). For further processing, we deﬁned two different FCAFs to compensate for hemisphere-speciﬁc
requirements, which are mainly caused by the different spatial coverage and mobility of the sea ice
extent. In the Antarctic, sea ice extends further north, and is therefore more frequently inﬂuenced by
warm air advection from mid-latitudes. Associated to the warm air advection are clouds, which is
shown by the higher average cloud fraction compared to the Arctic (Table 1). The temperature contrast
is also reduced when warm air is advected, thus increasing the uncertainty for the identiﬁcation of
leads based on their temperature anomaly. The input parameters for the FCAFs for the Northern and
Southern Hemispheres are listed in Table 2. Two additional parameters are calculated for the FCAF,
namely the background temperature anomaly and the clear sky ratio. The ﬁrst represents the daily
averaged regional surface temperature minus its climatological mean. It turns out, that large-scale
positive surface temperature anomalies are particularly associated with the formation of clouds and
reduce the IST contrast over leads, making the background temperature anomaly a valuable additional
metric for the FCAF. The clear sky ratio is the fraction of clear-sky observations per day in relation
Remote Sens. 2020, 12, 1957
8 of 16
to the maximum possible number of observations, that is, number of tiles per day and pixel and
represents a useful metric to address conﬁdence to a lead retrieval.
In Figure 5 an outline of the FCAF is shown, indicating that all input parameters are combined
by internal fuzzy variables and membership functions, processed accordingly and the ﬁnal LS is
thereby calculated for every day. For instance, the POTOWA is combined with the clear sky ratio by
formulating the rule, that both must have high values for the LS to be high. An overview of the fuzzy
rules for both polar regions is given in Table A1, respectively. An example of the retrieved daily LS
maps for the Arctic and Antarctic is presented in Figure 6. As indicated by yellow arrows, high LS
values are present in the Beaufort Gyre and Fram Strait (left, Arctic), or in the Weddell Sea and Ross
Sea (right, Antarctic) and indicate the presence of sea ice leads with high conﬁdence. Red arrows,
however, are rather indicative of lead detection with lower conﬁdence or artefacts.
Figure 5. Detailed view of the fuzzy inference system used for the FCAF (2nd level, Figure 1) with
a selection of input parameters and the retrieval of a single-layer Lead Score (LS). The membership
functions for each parameter have both characteristics for high (H) and low (L) values, which are
then processed by rules and output membership functions (see Appendix A for detailed information).
Parameters crossing others (e.g., clear sky fraction) indicate a combination of two (or more) parameters
within one rule.
Table 2. List of parameters used for both FCAFs with the input parameters coming from the daily stacks.
FCAF Input Parameter
Originating From
Description
potential leads
IST
positive local temperature anomaly
predicted leads
linearity, edges, texture
parameters
logistic regression, binary output (leads | no leads)
combined texture
hough-derived
parameters
combination of hough-parameters: e.g., dissimilarity
linearity
edges, POTOWA
linearity of potential lead objects. High = lead
background temperature
anomaly
IST
climatological mean of IST—daily IST. Indicative for
warm air advection
clear sky ratio
MODIS cloudmask
number of clear sky observations per day in relation to
number of tiles per day and pixel
POTOWA
IST
potential open water: fraction a pixel is covered by
open water
white tophat POTOWA
POTOWA
ﬁltered POTOWA, keeps small objects with high
POTOWA
edges
POTOWA
Canny ﬁltered image
Remote Sens. 2020, 12, 1957
9 of 16
Figure 6. Maps showing the lead scores for the Arctic (26 November 2007, left) and Antarctic (23 May
2016, right), similar to Figure 4. High lead scores indicate the presence of sea ice leads (yellow arrows),
while lower values represent leads with lower conﬁdence or non-lead objects, i.e., cloud artefacts
(red arrows).
3. Results
The LS histograms for both hemispheres are presented in Figure 7. Both distributions show a large
mode of LS values smaller than 30 and lower but increasing frequencies for higher LS values. The large
class of LS values below 30 contains pixels that are prone to a low probability for a true lead, which
emerges from the fuzzy rules and emberships applied. However, true leads may be included in the
artefact class but with a high retrieval uncertainty. In contrast, the LS exceeding a value of 30 provides
increasing conﬁdence for the presence of a true lead. The LS is not a direct measure for uncertainty,
but rather an indicator that a respective pixel belongs gradually to either artefacts or leads. Therefore,
we performed a manual quality control to associate LS values with the probability of false detections
and to derive the associated transfer function, with which we can then obtain pixel-wise uncertainties.
Figure 7. Lead score (LS) distributions for both hemispheres for one day derived from the data shown
in Figure 6. The large class of LS below 30 represents lead identiﬁcations with low conﬁdence and can
be interpreted as artefacts.
Remote Sens. 2020, 12, 1957
10 of 16
We conduct a manual quality control (MQC) for each hemisphere yielding two different transfer
functions for the calculation of detection uncertainty from LS. Within a set of 6 representative LS maps
for each hemisphere, areas containing true sea ice leads and artefacts were visually identiﬁed and
classiﬁed, respectively. Subsequently, the probability of artefact detection is calculated for each of the
applied LS classes. Afterwards, a linear regression model describing the relation between probability
of artefact detection and LS class yields the transfer function, which is used to calculate pixel-wise
uncertainties (Figure 8). The previously identiﬁed artefact class (LS < 30) is not included in the linear
regression, but obviously corresponds to uncertainties larger than 30% (Arctic) and 50% (Antarctic).
The slope of the transfer function for the Arctic is smaller compared to the Antarctic, indicating that
the uncertainty is higher for most areas in the Antarctic. However, for LS larger than 45 the uncertainty
decreases to less than 10% in both hemispheres.
Figure 8. Transfer function for the Arctic (left) and Antarctic (right) based on which a pixel-wise
uncertainty is calculated for all potential sea ice leads. The respective coefﬁcients for the functions are
given in the graphic.
Figure 9 shows the resulting lead uncertainties for the Arctic and Antarctic for one day with a
detailed view corresponding to the red rectangle. White arrows indicate the location of identiﬁed leads
with low uncertainties, while dark-gray colored areas correspond to artefacts and black colored areas
represent the MODIS cloudmask. The artefact class can be used as an additional cloud mask, meaning
that no information about surface features is available. For the presented day in the Arctic, leads with
high conﬁdence can be seen throughout the entire hemisphere with pronounced leads in the Beaufort
Gyre, Fram Strait, Bafﬁn Bay, and Kara Sea. In the Antarctic, leads are predominantly present in the
Weddell Sea and in the Ross Sea. The inﬂuence of clouds and large-scale temperature gradients is
visible in the smooth gradient of uncertainties indicated by the blue arrow (Figure 9d). The uncertainty
increases in the neighborhood of clouds due to the associated warm air advection in this case, which
in turn evokes a positive temperature anomaly weakening the local temperature contrast.
Remote Sens. 2020, 12, 1957
11 of 16
Figure 9. Maps showing the pixel-wise uncertainty for the Arctic (26 November 2007, a) and Antarctic
(23 May 2016, b), with an inset (red rectangle) in the Beaufort Sea (c, Arctic) and Weddell Sea
(d, Antarctic). White arrows indicate the location of true sea ice leads, while black arrows indicate
artefacts. The blue arrow in (d) shows a transition zone coming from clouds and the associated
warm air advection with high uncertainties (yellow) towards clear-sky situations with very low
uncertainties (green).
Based on the obtained daily lead data we can derive long-term average lead frequencies for
both hemispheres. Figure 10 shows the relative lead frequency for the Arctic (2002/03 to 2018/19,
November to April) and the Antarctic (2003 to 2019, April to September) as derived from the daily lead
observations. For this purpose, all daily lead maps were averaged over the respective time-period,
with artefacts (LS < 30) being excluded. For both hemispheres, increased lead frequencies can be seen
along the shelf break. In the Arctic, lead frequencies are also increased in the Beaufort Gyre, Bafﬁn Bay,
the Greenland, and the Barents Seas. Similarly, patterns of increased lead frequencies are present in
the Antarctic, where for instance north of the coastline a band of increased lead frequencies is visible.
Additionally, lead frequencies increase where islands and deep sea features in the bathymetry are
present, that is, ridges and troughs. Thereby, frequencies exceed 0.4 (Arctic) and 0.2 (Antarctic) in
several regions.
Based on the presented algorithm, a data set for both hemispheres was produced which includes
daily ﬁelds of sea ice leads and the pixel-wise lead retrieval uncertainty. The lead data contains the
classes of sea ice, leads, artefacts, cloudmask, landmask, and areas of open water.
Remote Sens. 2020, 12, 1957
12 of 16
Figure 10. Long-term average sea ice lead frequencies for the Arctic (November–April 2002/03–
2018/19, left) and Antarctic (April–September 2003–2019, right) based on manual quality control
(MQC) assessed lead data.
4. Discussion
In the presented algorithm, we consider leads as pixels with a signiﬁcant local temperature
anomaly, which suggests that the ﬂuxes of latent and sensible heat are enhanced at identiﬁed leads [2,3].
Leads also contribute to the formation of dense water due to the production of new ice and the
associated brine rejection, which ultimately affects the ocean circulation [1,8–10]. The mentioned
processes associated to leads imply that our results represent a data set, which can be used for for
example, high-resolution modelling studies. Although the spatial resolution was increased compared
to the product of References [23,27], further research needs to be done to derive leads with higher
spatial resolution on a circum-polar scale, since References [6,7] show that particularly narrow leads
effectively contribute to these exchange processes.
However, our presented algorithm allows the ﬁrst comparable observation of sea ice leads in
both hemispheres. The deﬁnition of leads is consistent in both hemispheres and allows a better
inter-hemispheric comparison.
To increase the quality of our results, we derive temperature-,
shape- and texture-based metrics, for example, the linearity as an indicator for sea ice leads. In doing
so, we include a number of independent metrics, which all are solely based on IST data and
are subsequently used to separate artefacts from true leads. A major improvement—compared
to the previous study by Reference [23] and other studies using ﬁxed thresholds, for example,
References [16,27]—is the use of an adaptive local thresholding technique which ensures the
identiﬁcation of potential sea ice leads, particularly when the local temperature contrast is weak
due to warm air advection. Consequently, more potential sea ice leads are identiﬁed. However,
we only make use of clear-sky situations and constrain our lead detection to the winter months to
beneﬁt from a generally high temperature contrast between open water and sea ice.
Because of the sea ice drift, leads might be relocated during the course of one day. Our procedure
aims to provide data from which one can infer where a lead, that is, a signiﬁcant local surface
temperature anomaly, was identiﬁed during the course of one day, regardless of the drift. In the
ﬁnal data product, a strong drift induces an increase in uncertainty to the margins of a lead due to a
decreased number of daily lead observations per pixel. Since the ice motion is in some areas on the
order of approximately 10 km/d ([31,32], narrow leads in regions of strong ice drift are affected the
Remote Sens. 2020, 12, 1957
13 of 16
most by this circumstance. The advantage of our approach including pixel-based uncertainties is, in this
regard, that we do not have to make a decision on whether to include observations of drifting leads to
the daily map or not, but rather to assign an individual uncertainty value to single lead identiﬁcations,
which will in turn address the local impact of the respective lead on exchange processes.
To compensate for cloud artefacts, we apply the FCAF that was successfully used in Reference [23]
and use different input data and apply speciﬁc rules for each hemisphere, respectively (Table 2) to
ensure a high data quality. Since the largest source for errors is unidentiﬁed clouds, the FCAF is
designed to recognize cloud artefacts. Rather than assessing the identiﬁed lead objects by a chain of
several tests (Bulk lead detection in Reference [27]), we apply the FCAF to assess the derived metrics
with respect to true leads and cloud artefacts simultaneously. We support our derived lead maps
with pixel-wise uncertainties which can be used as a quality ﬂag. The above mentioned sea ice drift
and displacement of sea ice leads as well as large-scale warm air advection result in an increased
uncertainty of a detected lead. However, the pixels in the core of a lead as well as slow moving
leads receive lower uncertainties and thereby provide higher conﬁdences. The resulting artefact class
might be used as an extension for the MODIS cloud mask. With respect to the inter-hemispheric
comparison of lead retrieval uncertainties, Figure 8 indicates that uncertainties for the Antarctic are
generally higher than for the Arctic, which is caused by a generally higher cloud fraction (Table 1)
and a smaller repetition rate of satellite overpasses due to the geographical extent. This results in
less frequent clear-sky observations. However, uncertainties also drop below 10% for the highest LS
classes, indicating that it is possible to detect leads with high conﬁdence but at the cost of loosing more
true leads to the artefact class.
As mentioned in, for example, Reference [16] the observed leads depend highly on the data used.
For surface temperature data where the local temperature contrast between leads and the surrounding
sea ice is crucial, differences to other retrieval algorithms using passive or active microwave data,
for example, AMSR-E or SAR, (e.g., References [20,22]) can be expected not only because of the spatial
resolution but also because of the satellite sensor speciﬁcation and acquisition mode. Reference [20]
rely on passive microwave data and identify leads broader than 3 km, which results in less lead
observations compared to our results. Also the broadly used SIC data from passive microwave data are
not capable of resolving smaller leads as it is demonstrated for the Arctic in Reference [23]. Although
we use multiple overpasses by the satellite sensors to ﬁll data gaps, some areas are persistently
covered by clouds throughout a day, which means that data gaps remain in the daily lead maps.
A multi-day average or merging with other data products, for example, Reference [20], might be a
valuable approach to ﬁll remaining data gaps.
Several hot spots where sea ice leads are predominantly present can be identiﬁed, for example,
the Beaufort Gyre, Greenland Sea, and Barents Sea (Arctic) and the Weddell Sea and Ross Sea (Antarctic).
Similar to the studies by Reference [24] for the Arctic and Reference [33] for the Antarctic, we calculated
the long-term average lead frequency based on the ﬁltered data (Figure 10), which reveals persistent
lead locations in both hemispheres with respect to lead occurrences, where frequencies of 0.4 (Arctic)
and 0.2 (Antarctic) are exceeded in several regions, for example, along the continental shelf break
and bathymetric features in the deep sea. Compared with the long-term average of potential leads
in the Antarctic as shown in Reference [33] (Figure 1), the ﬁltered lead frequencies are lower due
to the application of the FCAF, which removes artefacts from the potential lead maps. However,
the overall pattern with increased frequencies along the shelf break as well as over troughs and ridges
are preserved after the ﬁltering.
The derived daily lead maps can be used for different applications. First, we consider them
as a useful boundary ﬁeld for regional climate and ocean modeling. Especially with the provided
uncertainty, an assimilation of daily lead maps becomes feasible. Second, the lead maps can be
interpreted in comparison to other lead products (e.g., References [15,26]) and third, the lead data
can be used to analyze temporal and spatial patterns in lead characteristics and potential forcings in
both hemispheres.
Remote Sens. 2020, 12, 1957
14 of 16
5. Conclusions and Outlook
This study presents a new and robust algorithm to produce daily maps of sea ice leads for the
Arctic (November to April) and Antarctic (April – September). Based on thermal satellite imagery
from MODIS, we ﬁrst process all individual swaths and identify potential sea ice leads and further
metrics, and second remove cloud artefacts emerging from deﬁcits in the MODIS cloud mask with the
FCAF. Finally, we conduct a manual quality control and calculate pixel-wise uncertainties and obtain
daily circum-polar maps of sea ice leads. With the developed algorithm, we present an update for the
Arctic and introduce a new lead data set for the Antarctic and present maps of the long-term average
lead frequencies for both hemispheres.
The pixel-wise uncertainty will allow for an assimilation of the presented lead maps into boundary
conditions for regional climate models and thereby support improved heat ﬂux calculations. In the
follow-up studies, we plan to study the spatial and temporal dynamics of sea ice leads for both
hemispheres in detail. By doing so, we aim to reveal the long-term evolution of sea ice leads in
both hemispheres with respect to atmospheric and oceanographic forcings. The comparison of our
produced lead data with others is also planned and will help to improve our understanding of the
small scale sea ice dynamics.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, F.R., S.W.; Methodology, F.R., S.W., G.H.; Software, F.R., S.W.; Formal
Analysis, F.R., S.W.; Data Curation, F.R., S.W.; Writing—Original Draft Preparation, F.R.; Writing—Review and
Editing, F.R., S.W., G.H.; Visualization, F.R.; Supervision, S.W., G.H.; Project Administration, G.H.; Funding
Acquisition, G.H., S.W. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: The research was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) in the framework of the
priority program “Antarctic Research with comparative investigations in Arctic ice areas” under Grants HE
2740/22 and WI 3314/3 and it was also supported by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF)
under grants 03F0776D and 03F831C. The publication was funded by the Open Access Fund of the University of
Trier and the German Research Foundation (DFG) within the Open Access Publishing funding program.
Acknowledgments: The authors want to thank the NSIDC for providing the MODIS IST data. All processing was
done in Python3. We also want to thank J.D. Warner for the implementation and his support during the usage
of the fuzzy logic in python (scikit-fuzzy) and we acknowledge the Norwegian Polar Institute’s Quantarctica
package version 3 and the QGIS Development Team. The supplementary data (lead climatology for the Arctic and
Antarctic) are available at the online archive PANGAEA (https://doi.org/10.1594/PANGAEA.917588).
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
AMSR-E
Advanced microwave sensor EOS
EOS
Earth Observing Satellite
FCAF
Fuzzy Cloud Artefact Filter
IST
Ice surface temperature
LS
Lead Score
MODIS
Moderate resolution imaging spectroradiometer
MQC
Manual quality control
SAR
Synthetic Aperture Radar
Appendix A
As described in Section 2, we use two FCAFs for each polar region. In Figure 5 and Table 2 the
relevant input data and a schematic illustration of the fuzzy membership functions and rules are
shown. Table A1 present additional information about the hemisphere-speciﬁc input data and the
corresponding fuzzy membership functions and rules for the Arctic (top) and the Antarctic (bottom).
For the respective rules, where multiple input data are included, they are combined with the operation
and. All weights for the rules are the same.
Remote Sens. 2020, 12, 1957
15 of 16
Table A1. Fuzzy rules for the Arctic (top) and the Antarctic (bottom) with high input variables
corresponding to high LS (left column) and low input variables corresponding to low LS (right column).
Multiple input variables for one rule are combined by the operation and. The parameters are described
in Table 2 in Section 2.
input ’high’ →LS ’high’
input ’low’ →LS ’low’
ARCTIC
potential leads
potential leads
predicted leads
edges
combined texture
POTOWA
backgr.t-anomaly
clear sky ratio
ANTARCTIC
potential leads
potential leads
predicted leads
clear sky ratio
clear sky ratio
linearity
combined texture
white tophat POTOWA
backgr. t-anomaly
References
1.
Smith, S.D.; Muench, R.D.; Pease, C.H. Polynyas and leads: An overview of physical processes and
environment. J. Geophys. Res. 1990, 95, 9461–9479. [CrossRef]
2.
Alam, A.; Curry, J. Lead-induced atmospheric circulations. J. Geophys. Res. 1995, 100, 4643–4651. [CrossRef]
3.
Maykut, G.A. Energy exchange over young sea ice in the central Arctic. J. Geophys. Res. 1978, 83, 3646–3658.
[CrossRef]
4.
Zulauf, M.A. Two-dimensional cloud-resolving modeling of the atmospheric effects of Arctic leads based
upon midwinter conditions at the Surface Heat Budget of the Arctic Ocean ice camp. J. Geophys. Res. 2003,
108. [CrossRef]
5.
Chechin, D.G.; Makhotina, I.A.; Lüpkes, C.; Makshtas, A.P. Effect of Wind Speed and Leads on Clear-Sky
Cooling over Arctic Sea Ice during Polar Night. J. Atmos. Sci. 2019, 76, 2481–2503. [CrossRef]
6.
Lüpkes, C.; Vihma, T.; Birnbaum, G.; Wacker, U. Inﬂuence of leads in sea ice on the temperature of the
atmospheric boundary layer during polar night. Geophys. Res. Lett. 2008, 35. [CrossRef]
7.
Marcq, S.; Weiss, J. Inﬂuence of sea ice lead-width distribution on turbulent heat transfer between the ocean
and the atmosphere. Cryosphere 2012, 6, 143–156. [CrossRef]
8.
Key, J.; Stone, R.; Maslanik, J.; Ellefsen, E. The detectability of sea-ice leads in satellite data as a function of
atmospheric conditions and measurement scale. Ann. Glaciol. 1993, 17, 227–232. [CrossRef]
9.
Ohshima, K.I.; Fukamachi, Y.; Williams, G.D.; Nihashi, S.; Roquet, F.; Kitade, Y.; Tamura, T.; Hirano, D.;
Herraiz-Borreguero, L.; Field, I.; et al. Antarctic Bottom Water production by intense sea-ice formation in
the Cape Darnley polynya. Nat. Geosci. 2013, 6, 235–240. [CrossRef]
10.
Zwally, H.J.; Comiso, J.C.; Gordon, A.L. Antarctic offshore leads and polynyas and oceanographic effects.
In Oceanology of the Antarctic Continental Shelf; American Geophysical Union: Washington, DC, USA, 1985;
pp. 203–226. [CrossRef]
11.
Kort, E.A.; Wofsy, S.C.; Daube, B.C.; Diao, M.; Elkins, J.W.; Gao, R.S.; Hintsa, E.J.; Hurst, D.F.; Jimenez, R.;
Moore, F.L.; et al. Atmospheric observations of Arctic Ocean methane emissions up to 82◦north. Nat. Geosci.
2012, 5, 318–321. [CrossRef]
12.
Damm, E.; Rudels, B.; Schauer, U.; Mau, S.; Dieckmann, G. Methane excess in Arctic surface water- triggered
by sea ice formation and melting. Sci. Rep. 2015, 5. [CrossRef]
13.
Stirling, I. The importance of polynyas, ice edges, and leads to marine mammals and birds. J. Mar. Syst.
1997, 10, 9–21. [CrossRef]
14.
Müller, M.; Batrak, Y.; Kristiansen, J.; Køltzow, M.A.Ø.; Noer, G.; Korosov, A.
Characteristics of
a Convective-Scale Weather Forecasting System for the European Arctic. Mon. Weather Rev.
2017,
145, 4771–4787. [CrossRef]
Remote Sens. 2020, 12, 1957
16 of 16
15.
Wang, Q.; Danilov, S.; Jung, T.; Kaleschke, L.; Wernecke, A. Sea ice leads in the Arctic Ocean: Model
assessment, interannual variability and trends. Geophys. Res. Lett. 2016, 43, 7019–7027. [CrossRef]
16.
Lindsay, R.W.; Rothrock, D.A. Arctic sea ice leads from advanced very high resolution radiometer images.
J. Geophys. Res. 1995, 100, 4533–4544. [CrossRef]
17.
Miles, M.W.; Barry, R.G. A 5-year satellite climatology of winter sea ice leads in the western Arctic. J. Geophys.
Res. Oceans 1998, 103, 21723–21734. [CrossRef]
18.
Drüe, C.; Heinemann, G. High-resolution maps of the sea-ice concentration from MODIS satellite data.
Geophys. Res. Lett. 2004, 31. [CrossRef]
19.
Drüe, C.; Heinemann, G.
Accuracy assessment of sea-ice concentrations from MODIS using in-situ
measurements. Remote Sens. Environ. 2005, 95, 139–149. [CrossRef]
20.
Röhrs, J.; Kaleschke, L. An algorithm to detect sea ice leads by using AMSR-E passive microwave imagery.
Cryosphere 2012, 6, 343–352. [CrossRef]
21.
Bröhan, D.; Kaleschke, L. A Nine-Year Climatology of Arctic Sea Ice Lead Orientation and Frequency from
AMSR-E. Remote Sens. 2014, 6, 1451–1475. [CrossRef]
22.
Wernecke, A.; Kaleschke, L. Lead detection in Arctic sea ice from CryoSat-2: Quality assessment, lead area
fraction and width distribution. Cryosphere 2015, 9, 1955–1968. [CrossRef]
23.
Willmes, S.; Heinemann, G. Pan-Arctic lead detection from MODIS thermal infrared imagery. Ann. Glaciol.
2015, 56, 29–37. [CrossRef]
24.
Willmes, S.; Heinemann, G. Sea-Ice Wintertime Lead Frequencies and Regional Characteristics in the Arctic,
2003–2015. Remote Sens. 2016, 8, 4. [CrossRef]
25.
Ivanova, N.; Rampal, P.; Bouillon, S. Error assessment of satellite-derived lead fraction in the Arctic.
Cryosphere 2016, 10, 585–595. [CrossRef]
26.
Lee, S.; cheol Kim, H.; Im, J. Arctic lead detection using a waveform mixture algorithm from CryoSat-2 data.
Cryosphere 2018, 12, 1665–1679. [CrossRef]
27.
Hoffman, J.; Ackerman, S.; Liu, Y.; Key, J. The Detection and Characterization of Arctic Sea Ice Leads with
Satellite Imagers. Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 521. [CrossRef]
28.
Hall, D.K.; Riggs, G. MODIS/Terra Sea Ice Extent 5-Min L2 Swath 1km, Version 6. [Southern Hemisphere].
Available online: https://nsidc.org/data/MOD29/versions/6 (accessed on 15 October 2019).
29.
Canny, J. A Computational Approach to Edge Detection. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 1986,
PAMI-8, 679–698. [CrossRef]
30.
Zadeh, L. Fuzzy sets. Inf. Control 1965, 8, 338–353. [CrossRef]
31.
Spreen, G.; Kwok, R.; Menemenlis, D. Trends in Arctic sea ice drift and role of wind forcing: 1992-2009.
Geophys. Res. Lett. 2011, 38. [CrossRef]
32.
Holland, P.R.; Kwok, R. Wind-driven trends in Antarctic sea-ice drift.
Nat. Geosci. 2012, 5, 872–875.
[CrossRef]
33.
Reiser, F.; Willmes, S.; Hausmann, U.; Heinemann, G. Predominant Sea Ice Fracture Zones Around Antarctica
and Their Relation to Bathymetric Features. Geophys. Res. Lett. 2019, 46, 12117–12124. [CrossRef]
c⃝2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
